IT IS SEVEN SEVEN O'CLOCK AND I
AM GOING TO CALL OUR WORK
SESSION TO ORDER I'LL TURN
THINGS OVER TO MR. TONY.
>> THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING TO ALL OF YOU.
WELCOME TO OUR SMALL BUT MIGHTY
WORK.
WE HAVE THREE SETS OF PRISONERS
THIS EVENING.
FIRST YOU GET THE OPPORTUNITY
TO HEAR FROM MONICA BOOD WHO IS
OUR NEW HRR AND LABOR RELATIONS
DIRECTOR.
SHE COMES TO US WITH A LONG AND
DISTINGUISHED CAREER WITHIN
THAT FIELD.
WE'RE VERY FORTUNATE TO HAVE
HER.
WE THOUGHT IT WOULD BE GOOD TO
MAKE SURE THAT YOU COULD PUT A
FACE A NAME TOGETHER WITH HER
AND HEAR ABOUT SOME OF THE
THINGS SHE'S WORKING ON AND
SHE'S MOVING ABOUT ENTREE INTO
CITY GOVERNMENT NEXT DR. STULTS
WILL COME UP AND SHE WILL
PREVIEW THE ITINERARY FOR OUR
HOSTING OF THE TUEBINGEN
DELEGATION THAT WILL BE COMING
IN SEPTEMBER.
THEY WILL BE HERE FOR SIX DAYS
.
WE HAVE BEEN PLANNING FOR
SEEMINGLY ONE YEAR AND WE'RE
VERY EXCITED TO HOST THEM WHEN
SHE FINISHES THAT SHE WILL TALK
TO YOU A LITTLE BIT ABOUT SOME
OF THE GRANTS THAT WE ARE
PURSUING AND THE LEVERAGING
OPPORTUNITIES THAT THOSE WILL
AFFORD US.
SO WE'RE LEVERAGING THE MILLICH
THAT THE COMMUNITY HAS CHOSEN
TO GIVE US.
WE'RE LOOKING FOR OTHER FUNDS
TO EXPAND THE WORK AND DR.
STULTS, WE'LL TALK ABOUT THAT
NOT ON THE AGENDA BUT I THOUGHT
INTERESTING AND RELEVANT TO
MENTION AT THE SAME TIME WE'RE
HOSTING OUR SISTER CITY.
WE ARE NOT THE PRIMARY HOSTS
BUT WE WILL BE INVOLVED IN THE
VISIT FROM CHAPEL HILL TO ANN
ARBOR.
SO THEY ARE SENDING 70 PEOPLE
HERE AND THEY'RE GOING TO SPEND
A COUPLE OF DAYS.
THEY HAVE THE MAJORITY OF TWO
CITY COUNCIL COMING WITH THEM.
THEY'RE PEERCE THEIR QUORUM IF
YOU WILL.
SO MEDIA WILL BE TRAVELING WITH
THEM.
THERE'S A NUMBER OF ELECTED
OFFICIALS, UNIVERSITY
PROFESSIONALS, FOLKS FROM CITY
GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS AND WHEN
YOU THINK ABOUT ALL THE WORK
THAT WE ARE DOING AND ALL THE
THINGS THAT WE FEEL I STILL
HAVE TO MOVE TOWARDS, THEY ARE
COMING BECAUSE THEY ARE
IMPRESSED WITH HOW WE'RE
APPROACHING AFFORDABLE HOUSING
DOWNTOWN VITALITY, ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT AND CLIMATE ACTION.
AND IF YOU UNDERSTAND THE
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE TRIANGLE,
THEY ARE INTERNATIONALLY
RECOGNIZED FOR THEIR
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
DEVELOPMENT.
SO TO THEM WE ARE DOING
SOMETHING RIGHT BECAUSE WE ARE
THE SAME SIZE IN TERMS
OF GEOGRAPHY BUT THEY ONLY HAVE
40 PERCENT OF THE DENSITY
OF ANN ARBOR AND THEY WANT TO
KNOW HOW DID YOU DO THAT?
>> SO SOME OF US WILL BE
ADDRESSING THEM WHILE THEY'RE
HERE AND THEY'RE SO EXCITED
THEY WILL EVEN BE DOING LAB
BROADCAST BACK TO CHAPEL HILL
WHILE THEY'RE IN ANN ARBOR.
SO I THOUGHT IT WOULD BE GOOD
TO PUT THAT OUT THERE AFTER DR.
STULTS IS FINISHED THEN DEREK
AND BRETT WILL COME UP.
WE'RE NOT FINISHED WITH THE
COMP PLAN BY ANY MEANS BUT
WE'RE GOING TO GIVE YOU A
STATUS CHECK ON KIND OF WHAT
WE'RE HEARING WHERE WE'RE AT
AND THEN THEY HAVE ONE OF THEIR
CONSULTANTS THAT WILL BE
TALKING TO YOU ONLINE AND THEN
AFTER THAT YOU GET SOME
SPECIFICS AS TO WHAT WE'RE
DOING WITH OUR DEVELOPMENT
PROCESS.
WE'VE TALKED A LOT ABOUT IT BUT
WHAT ARE THINGS THAT WE'RE
ACTUALLY DOING TO MAKE THE
PROCESS BETTER FOR THE USERS?
AND SO YOU'LL HEAR A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THAT AND AFTERWARDS WE'LL
GO HOME AND HOPE THE OLYMPICS
IS STILL GOING.
COUNCILS EXCITED MONACA COME ON
.
GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU FOR ALLOWING ME TO
TAKE A FEW MINUTES TO INTRODUCE
MYSELF.
I KNOW YOU HAVE A BUSY AGENDA
THIS EVENING SO I'LL KEEP IT
RELATIVELY SHORT.
MY MONICA BOOTH AND I WAS BORN
IN ANN ARBOR.
THANK YOU AND I WAS RAISED IN
THE LOCAL AREA.
I FOLLOWED BOTH OF MY PARENTS
INTO PUBLIC SERVICE.
ONE WORKED FOR THE CITY AND
WORKED FOR THE COUNTY.
BOTH OF MY SIBLINGS WORKED FOR
PUBLIC SECTOR AS WELL.
SO I HAVE TWENTY EIGHT YEARS
OF EXPERIENCE
HERE IN THE LOCAL
COMMUNITY COMING FROM THE
COUNTY AND THEN MOST RECENTLY
THE RIDE THAT WAS A REALLY
GREAT EXPERIENCE.
I BEGAN MY CAREER IN THE
BENEFITS AREA.
SOME OF YOU MAY KNOW FORMER
COUNTY ADMINISTRATOR VERNA
MCDANIEL.
SHE WAS A GREAT MENTOR AND I
REALLY APPRECIATED THE TIME
THAT I WAS ABLE TO WORK WITH
HER.
BUT I THINK THE TIME STARTING
AND BENEFITS REALLY LAYS THE
FOUNDATION FOR FOR THE FOCUS ON
EMPLOYEES AND HOW YOU CAN BEST
SUPPORT THEM AND MAKE THEIR
EXPERIENCE A REALLY GREAT
EXPERIENCE.
AND SO MY FOUNDATION IS IN THE
BENEFITS AREA AND THEN I
PROGRESSED THROUGH ALL OF THE
DIFFERENT AREAS WITHIN H.R.
SOME OF MY LOVES WERE THE
BENEFITS I REALLY LIKED USING
TECHNOLOGY AND TRYING TO HAVE
PROCESS IMPROVEMENT.
SO I WENT THROUGH A FEW
DIFFERENT TECHNOLOGY UPGRADES
THAT ALLOWED EMPLOYEES TO BE
ABLE TO BETTER UTILIZE THE
SERVICES FROM AN EMPLOYEE
PERSPECTIVE AND THEN MOST
RECENTLY MY FOCUS AND AND
PASSION HAS REALLY BEEN IN THE
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT AREA AND
EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT TO ME IS
MORE THAN JUST BEING SATISFIED
AS AN EMPLOYEE.
IT'S REALLY BEING ENGAGED AND
CONNECTED AND VALUING MY
COLLEAGUES AND THE PEOPLE
AROUND ME AND THE WORK THAT WE
DO AND I PARTICULARLY AFTER THE
LAST LONG COUPLE OF YEARS THE
WORK ENVIRONMENT HAS CHANGED,
RECRUITING HAS CHANGED,
RETAINING EMPLOYEES HAS
CHANGED.
SO I THINK EMPLOYEE ENGAGEMENT
IS PROBABLY ONE OF THE MOST
CRITICAL AREAS PARTICULARLY
TRYING TO HAVE MORE DIVERSITY
AND INCLUSION.
I THINK THAT IS REALLY WHERE
OFTENTIMES A PUBLIC SECTOR
EMPLOYER EMPLOYER CAN REALLY
FOCUS IN ON GAINING THOSE
EMPLOYEES AND THE EMPLOYEE
ENGAGEMENT RATHER THAN ALWAYS
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS.
WE CAN'T ALWAYS LEAD THE MARKET
IN THOSE AREAS WHILE WE DO A
GREAT JOB AND WE'RE IN THE
MIDDLE OF DOING A COMPENSATION
STUDY FOR A NONUNION STAFF AND
I THINK THAT WILL BE REALLY
INTERESTING.
BUT THOSE ARE THOSE FOUNDATIONS
.
BUT WE CAN MAKE THE
ORGANIZATION A GREAT PLACE TO
WORK BASED ON CULTURE AND
INCLUDING DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVES AND THE MORE THAT
WE CAN DO THAT YOU BUILT THE
CULTURE AND THAT IS WHERE
PARTICULAR IN MY OPINION FROM A
PUBLIC SECTOR EMPLOYER YOU'RE
REALLY GOING TO GET THAT TENURE
AND DIVERSITY OF THOUGHT AND
DIVERSITY OF OUTPUT.
I THINK THE EMPLOYEE EXPERIENCE
DIRECTLY RELATES TO THE
CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE AND THE
BETTER THAT THE EMPLOYEE
EXPERIENCES THE BETTER OUTCOMES
THAT YOU HAVE.
SO I'VE BEEN REALLY LOOKING
FORWARD TO MEETING EVERYBODY
HERE AT THE CITY.
I THINK THAT THERE'S A LOT
OF SIMILARITIES WITH THE COUNTY
BUT IT'S ALSO VERY DIFFERENT
AND I'VE BEEN SUPER EXCITED TO
LEARN FROM EVERYBODY THAT I'VE
COME IN CONTACT WITH THIS LAST
MONTH.
THE TEAM IS DOING REALLY WELL.
I THINK WE'RE STARTING TO LOOK
AT SOME LONG TERM STRATEGY WHAT
WE WANT TO DO FOR THE
ORGANIZATION WHERE THERE ARE
SOME THE EXCUSE ME WHERE THERE
SOME NEEDS THAT HAVEN'T BEEN
MET.
SO REALLY LOOKING AT THAT
COMPENSATOR STUDY EMPLOYEE
ENGAGEMENT AS FOLLOWS
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT AND THEN
THE USE OF TECHNOLOGY IN H.R.
TO BE ABLE TO ENGAGE EMPLOYEES.
>> SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
MR. BOOT DOESN'T EVEN HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS HERE.
THANK YOU
.
>> NEXT UP, WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
A PRESENTATION FROM DR. STOKES
ON OUR TUEBINGEN SOCIETY VISIT
LITTLE HELLO CITY COUNCIL
MEMBERS.
IT'S REALLY GREAT TO SEE YOU.
THANK YOU FOR THE OPPORTUNITY
TO BE HERE TONIGHT TO SHARE A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT OUR SISTER
CITY VISIT WHICH IS COMING IN
FIVE AND A HALF WEEKS VERY,
VERY FAST.
I JUST WANT TO PREFACE THIS BY
SAYING YOU INVITED TO ANYTHING
AND EVERYTHING THAT YOU SEE ON
THIS AGENDA.
SO IF SOMETHING REALLY JUMPS
OUT AT YOU, PLEASE COME AND LET
ME KNOW.
I'LL MAKE SURE TO GET YOU A
CALENDAR INVITATION.
OTHERWISE I'LL POINT OUT
EXPLICITLY WHERE WE ALREADY
PLANNED TO SEND YOU AN INVITE
FOR THESE FUN FESTIVITIES.
SO THE WAY I'M GOING TO DO THIS
IS JUST WALK THROUGH EACH
OF THE DAILY AGENDAS THAT WE
HAVE STRUCTURED AND THEN LET ME
KNOW IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS
ESPECIALLY IF YOU HAVE IDEAS
FOR THINGS THAT WE SHOULD BE
DOING THAT WE'RE NOT OR PEOPLE
WANT TO MAKE SURE YOU'RE
INVITED TO ANY OF THESE
SESSIONS.
SO I'M GOOD.
LET'S GO.
ALL RIGHT.
SO SISTER CITY IS JOINING US.
THEY ARE BRINGING SIX FOLKS
INCLUDING ELECTED LEADERS.
THE MAYOR LORD MAYOR PALMER
WILL BE JOINING AS WELL AS A
FEW DEPARTMENT HEADS.
THEY'LL BE COMING IN ON THE
FIFTEENTH WHICH IS A SUNDAY.
I'LL BE PICKING THEM UP AT THE
AIRPORT, BRINGING THEM IN.
THEY'RE STAYING DOWNTOWN FOR
THE MAJORITY OF THEIR STAY AT
THE MARRIOTT.
WE'LL SETTLE THEM IN REST
ASSURED WE HAVE WELCOME
PACKETS.
WE'RE GOING TO MAKE SURE THEY
HAVE A WONDERFUL FIRST
TRANSITION IN AND THEN ON
SUNDAY NIGHT WE HAVE AN
OPTIONAL DINNER.
THEY'RE LIKELY GOING TO BE
QUITE TIRED WITH TIME CHANGE.
SO WE'LL DO SOMETHING PRETTY
LOW KEY.
IF YOU'D LIKE TO JOIN US IN
WELCOMING FOLKS, PLEASE DO LET
ME KNOW OTHERWISE THIS FIRST
NIGHT IS PRETTY RELAXED AND
THEN WE GO FAST.
SO WE JUMP IN ON MONDAY MORNING
ON THE 16TH EACH DAY IS
STRUCTURED VERY SIMILARLY SO
THE MORNING WILL EACH DAY IS
THEMATICALLY TIED.
I'LL START THERE AND THEN IN
THE MORNING WE HAVE FOLKS KIND
OF IN MORE OF AN INFORMAL
ROUNDTABLE OR WE'LL BE
DISCUSSING WHAT WE'RE DOING IN
A GIVEN AREA AND ITS
INTERSECTION WITH
SUSTAINABILITY.
WE ALSO EACH DAY HAVE SOME SORT
OF PHYSICAL ACTIVITY THAT WE'RE
DOING WALKING TOWARDS GETTING
OUT IN THE RIVER AND YOU'LL SEE
THAT HERE AND THEN IN THE
EVENINGS WE HAVE SOME SORT OF A
RECEPTION OR CELEBRATION
OF SOMETHING ABOUT WHAT THE
UNIQUENESS OF ANN ARBOR, WHAT
MAKES US GREAT?
WHAT'S SOMETHING WE'RE REALLY
KIND OF PROUD OF IF IT'S NOT
CLEAR THEMATICALLY THEY ARE
COMING BECAUSE OF OUR WORK ON
CLIMATE ACTION.
SO EVERYTHING IS GOING TO HAVE
THAT HIGH IN MONDAY.
WE'RE FOCUSING ON
TRANSPORTATION AND LAND USE.
SO IN THIS SESSION WE'VE GOT
FOLKS WE'RE GOING TO SIT DOWN
AND TALK TO THEM ABOUT WHAT
WE'RE DOING IN TERMS OF VISION
ZERO HOUR EXPANSION BIKE LANES
ARE WALKING AND BIKING
INFRASTRUCTURE MORE BROADLY.
THEN WE'RE GOING TO TAKE THEM
OUT ON A BIKE TOUR SO THEY'RE
ACTUALLY GOING TO GO OUT AND
THEY'RE GOING TO RIDE BIKES AND
THEY'RE GOING TO SEE THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE IN ACTION.
THEY HAVE A PRIVATE TOUR
OF ZINGERMAN'S.
SO ROGER AND TEAM ARE GOING TO
SHOW THEM AROUND.
THEY'RE ALSO DOING A SPECIAL
LUNCH AT ZINGERMAN'S BECAUSE
OF COURSE THAT'S ICONIC AND YOU
MAY KNOW WE HAVE A SHOW AROUND
SUSTAINABILITY CALLED GREEN
LIGHT.
THERE WILL BE A SPECIAL
RECORDING OF GREEN LIGHT WITH
THE TWO MAYORS TALKING ABOUT
THEIR SHARED COMMITMENTS KIND
OF BANTERING BACK AND FORTH
LITTLE FRIENDLY COMPETITION
AROUND OUR SUSTAINABILITY WORK
.
IN THE EVENING WE GET TO SHINE
A LIGHT ON OUR VERY OWN JACKIE
GHADRY AND OUR CLERK'S OFFICE.
WE'RE DOING A SPECIAL SESSION
OUMA.
IT'S ALMOST CLOSED BUT IT'S
GOING TO BE OPEN FOR US.
WE'RE GOING TO INVITE THE
REGENTS FROM THE UNIVERSITY
LEADERSHIP OF THE UNIVERSITY.
ALL OF YOU WILL BE INVITED AND
JACKIE IS GOING TO BE THE STAR
TALKING ABOUT DEMOCRACY IN
ACTION BECAUSE THAT'S VERY
IMPORTANT TO ALL OF THE WORK
THAT WE DO.
SO WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A LITTLE
CELEBRATION SADLY YOU ALL IF
YOU JOIN US HAVE TO LEAVE TO
COME TO A COUNCIL MEETING.
BUT THAT'S OK BECAUSE WE'RE
GOING TO FOLLOW YOU AND THERE
WILL GET A PROCLAMATION
RECOGNIZING THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN OUR SISTER CITY THAT
EVENING.
>> SO KIND OF A NICE TRANSITION
DAY IN ON THE SEVENTEENTH AT
TUESDAY.
THE FOCUS IS ON THE CIRCULAR
ECONOMY THEY WERE VERY
INTERESTED IN LEARNING MORE
ABOUT OUR MATERIALS MANAGEMENT
PROCESS.
SO WE'RE GOING TO BE HEADING
DOWN TO WHEELER.
WE'VE GOT SARAH MASON AND TEAM
READY TO TALK ABOUT WHAT WE'RE
DOING AROUND CIRCULARITY BOTH
TRADITIONAL MANAGEMENT
OF COMPOST AND RECYCLING BUT
EVEN MORE OUR PARTNERSHIP ON
RETURNABLE CONTAINER PROGRAMS
ARE SWAPPED WORK.
WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO TO
REALLY EXPAND FROM AN
EXTRACTIVE ECONOMY TO MUCH MORE
OF THAT REGENERATIVE ECONOMY
THOUGH THEN DO A TOUR OF THE
MURF.
WE HAVE LUNCH AT BICENTENNIAL
PARK WHERE WE ACTUALLY HAVE
SOME OF OUR COMMUNITY PARTNERS
COMING IN I BELIEVE THIS DAY
IT'S LARYSSA SO STAFF FROM ARE
GOING TO CATER LUNCH AND THEN
THEY'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE
WORK THEY'RE DOING WITH US ON
SUSTAINABLE FOOD.
IF FOLKS DO NOT KNOW LARISA
ENTIRE MENU IF YOU WALK IN IS
LABELED LIKE A STOPLIGHT.
EVERYTHING GREEN HAS A LOW
CARBON FOOTPRINT.
EVERYTHING RED HAS A HIGH
SO WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT
CARBON FOOTPRINT.
HOW THAT WAS CREATED AND HOW WE
SO WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT
HELP EDUCATE PEOPLE ABOUT OUR
HOW THAT WAS CREATED AND HOW WE
FOOD CHOICES.
HELP EDUCATE PEOPLE ABOUT OUR
THEY ALSO PARTICIPATE WITH US
FOOD CHOICES.
ON A NUMBER OF OTHER EVENTS
THEY ALSO PARTICIPATE WITH US
FOLLOWING LUNCH AND THAT
ON A NUMBER OF OTHER EVENTS
WONDERFUL CONVERSATION PRETTY
FOLLOWING LUNCH AND THAT
RELAXED.
WONDERFUL CONVERSATION PRETTY
WE'RE GOING TO HEAD OVER TO
RELAXED.
BRYANT TO THE COMMUNITY CENTER.
WE'RE GOING TO HEAD OVER TO
WE'RE GOING TO DO A TOUR
BRYANT TO THE COMMUNITY CENTER.
OF THAT RESILIENCE HUB.
WE'RE GOING TO DO A TOUR
WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE
OF THAT RESILIENCE HUB.
RELATIONSHIP WITH CAN DEREK
WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE
MILLER WILL BE ON SITE AND THEN
RELATIONSHIP WITH CAN DEREK
WE'RE GOING TO DO A WALKING
MILLER WILL BE ON SITE AND THEN
TOUR WITH THE RESIDENTS TO TALK
WE'RE GOING TO DO A WALKING
ABOUT OUR WORK TO MAKE THAT
TOUR WITH THE RESIDENTS TO TALK
AMERICA'S FIRST CARBON NEUTRAL
ABOUT OUR WORK TO MAKE THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD.
AMERICA'S FIRST CARBON NEUTRAL
SO REALLY A LIVED EXPERIENCE IN
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THE EVENING WE'RE DOING A
SO REALLY A LIVED EXPERIENCE IN
SPECIAL DINNER RECEPTION AT
THE EVENING WE'RE DOING A
COBBLESTONED FARM AND WE'VE
SPECIAL DINNER RECEPTION AT
INVITED ALL OF THE EIGHT TO
COBBLESTONED FARM AND WE'VE
ZERO COLLABORATORS.
INVITED ALL OF THE EIGHT TO
SO HERE THE INTENT IS REALLY TO
ZERO COLLABORATORS.
SHOW THAT IT TAKES A VILLAGE.
SO HERE THE INTENT IS REALLY TO
SURE.
SHOW THAT IT TAKES A VILLAGE.
WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT WHAT
SURE.
STAFF ARE DOING BUT WE WANT TO
WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT WHAT
LEAN INTO OUR BUSINESSES, OUR
STAFF ARE DOING BUT WE WANT TO
NONPROFITS, OUR EDUCATIONAL
LEAN INTO OUR BUSINESSES, OUR
INSTITUTIONS, EVERYONE WHO'S
NONPROFITS, OUR EDUCATIONAL
STEPPING UP TO BE PART OF THIS
INSTITUTIONS, EVERYONE WHO'S
WORK ON WEDNESDAY IT'S CLIMATE
STEPPING UP TO BE PART OF THIS
DAY SO OUR TEAM IS GOING TO
WORK ON WEDNESDAY IT'S CLIMATE
CENTER AND TALK TO THEM ABOUT
DAY SO OUR TEAM IS GOING TO
OUR PROGRAMS LIKE OUR HOME
CENTER AND TALK TO THEM ABOUT
ENERGY REBATE HEARD ORDINANCE,
OUR PROGRAMS LIKE OUR HOME
THE WORK THAT WE'RE DOING
ENERGY REBATE HEARD ORDINANCE,
AROUND SUSTAINABLE FOOD MORE
THE WORK THAT WE'RE DOING
BROADLY.
AROUND SUSTAINABLE FOOD MORE
BUT IT'LL IT'LL BE CENTERED
BROADLY.
HERE AT CITY HALL.
BUT IT'LL IT'LL BE CENTERED
WE'RE THEN GOING OVER TO THE
HERE AT CITY HALL.
FARMER'S MARKET SO WEDNESDAY TO
WE'RE THEN GOING OVER TO THE
FARMER'S MARKET DAY THEY'LL
FARMER'S MARKET SO WEDNESDAY TO
HAVE A SPECIAL TOUR WITH THE
FARMER'S MARKET DAY THEY'LL
MARKET MANAGER.
HAVE A SPECIAL TOUR WITH THE
WE'LL ACTUALLY PICK UP SOME
MARKET MANAGER.
SNACKS FROM THE MARKET.
WE'LL ACTUALLY PICK UP SOME
WE MAY HEAD OVER TO THE FIRE
SNACKS FROM THE MARKET.
STATION AND COOK THOSE WORKING
WE MAY HEAD OVER TO THE FIRE
ON THE CHIEF WITH THE CHIEF ON
STATION AND COOK THOSE WORKING
THAT AFTERNOON PHYLLIS'S OPEN
ON THE CHIEF WITH THE CHIEF ON
THE DETROIT STREET FILLING
THAT AFTERNOON PHYLLIS'S OPEN
STATION SO THEY'LL HAVE LUNCH
THE DETROIT STREET FILLING
WITH THE ENTIRE TEAM AND THEN
STATION SO THEY'LL HAVE LUNCH
WE ARE TAKING THEM THANKS TO
WITH THE ENTIRE TEAM AND THEN
THE HURON RIVER WATERSHED
WE ARE TAKING THEM THANKS TO
COUNCIL OUT ON A BOATING TOUR.
THE HURON RIVER WATERSHED
SO THEY'RE GOING TO LEAD US.
COUNCIL OUT ON A BOATING TOUR.
WE ALSO WILL HAVE AT THIS POINT
SO THEY'RE GOING TO LEAD US.
A PARK DEDICATION.
WE ALSO WILL HAVE AT THIS POINT
WE HAVE A SPECIAL BENCH THAT WE
A PARK DEDICATION.
PURCHASED TO BEGIN PARK.
WE HAVE A SPECIAL BENCH THAT WE
THE PLAQUE IS BEING DESIGNED
PURCHASED TO BEGIN PARK.
RIGHT NOW.
THE PLAQUE IS BEING DESIGNED
WE'LL INVITE THE MEDIA OUT.
RIGHT NOW.
YOU WILL ALL BE INVITED AS
WE'LL INVITE THE MEDIA OUT.
WELL.
YOU WILL ALL BE INVITED AS
AND AGAIN, YOU ARE WELCOME TO
WELL.
JOIN US OUT ON THE RIVER.
AND AGAIN, YOU ARE WELCOME TO
WE WILL THEN COME BACK AND IN
JOIN US OUT ON THE RIVER.
THE EVENING WE HAVE A SPECIAL
WE WILL THEN COME BACK AND IN
SESSION AT THE LIBRARY DOWNTOWN
THE EVENING WE HAVE A SPECIAL
IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE LIBRARY
SESSION AT THE LIBRARY DOWNTOWN
WHERE LORD MAYOR PALMER FROM
IN PARTNERSHIP WITH THE LIBRARY
TCHIVIDJIAN IS GOING TO GIVE AN
WHERE LORD MAYOR PALMER FROM
UPDATE ON THEIR WORK ON CLIMATE
TCHIVIDJIAN IS GOING TO GIVE AN
ACTION AND WHAT WE CAN LEARN
UPDATE ON THEIR WORK ON CLIMATE
FROM IT AS WELL AS WHAT WE ARE
ACTION AND WHAT WE CAN LEARN
INSPIRING IN THE WORK THAT THEY
FROM IT AS WELL AS WHAT WE ARE
ARE DOING.
INSPIRING IN THE WORK THAT THEY
I JUST WANT TO NOTE TOO WE HAVE
ARE DOING.
SENT A FORMAL DELEGATION FROM
I JUST WANT TO NOTE TOO WE HAVE
THE MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT IS SIX
SENT A FORMAL DELEGATION FROM
FOLKS COMING IN AND THAT'S WHAT
THE MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT IS SIX
I'M REALLY TALKING ABOUT.
FOLKS COMING IN AND THAT'S WHAT
THEY ARE ALSO BRINGING A
I'M REALLY TALKING ABOUT.
DELEGATION DELEGATION
THEY ARE ALSO BRINGING A
OF RESIDENTS.
DELEGATION DELEGATION
SO I THINK THEY HAVE UPWARDS
OF RESIDENTS.
OF 18 FOLKS WHO ARE ALSO GOING
SO I THINK THEY HAVE UPWARDS
TO BE JOINING.
OF 18 FOLKS WHO ARE ALSO GOING
YES.
TO BE JOINING.
SO THEY COME IN ON WEDNESDAY
YES.
AND THEY'RE GOING TO MEET US AT
SO THEY COME IN ON WEDNESDAY
THE LIBRARY.
AND THEY'RE GOING TO MEET US AT
SO THAT'S AN OPPORTUNITY.
THE LIBRARY.
CERTAINLY THE MAYOR WILL BE THE
SO THAT'S AN OPPORTUNITY.
STAR OF THAT SHOW BUT
THE
RESIDENTS WILL ALSO BE THERE TO
INTERACT WITH MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC.
THIS IS A PUBLIC EVENT.
WE'D REALLY APPRECIATE YOUR
HELP IN GETTING THE WORD OUT
ABOUT IT.
WE WANT TO SHOW IT REALLY CARES
ABOUT THIS TOPIC THURSDAY WE'RE
HEADING DOWN TO TALK ABOUT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
SUSTAINABILITY AND THE
INTERSECTION OF THAT WORK AND
THE CHALLENGES OF THAT
INTERSECTION AND HOW WE'RE
NAVIGATING IT.
SO GENERAL HALL IS GOING TO BE
LEADING THEM ON A DISCUSSION
AND THEN A TOUR OF THE HOUSING
COMMISSION SITE THE AFTERNOON
THANKS TO COLLABORATION AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN, WE HAVE
A SPECIAL TOUR OF CITY FOR THE
OFFICIAL DELEGATION AND THE
RESIDENT DELEGATION.
SO WE'RE COMBINING FOR THE
AFTERNOON.
WE ALSO WE'RE GOING TO GO CHECK
OUT THE ROBOTICS CENTER.
THEY HAVE A SPECIAL TOUR WITH
THE DIRECTOR THERE AND LUNCH
BEING CATERED KIND OF ON NORTH
CAMPUS BROADLY.
THEN IN THE EVENING WE'RE GOING
TO STICK WITH THE UNIVERSITY.
WE HAVE THE BOTANICAL GARDENS
IF MANY OF YOU HAVE BEEN TO THE
STRAW BALE HOUSE, IT'S
STUNNING.
IT'S BEAUTIFUL.
IT'S ALL LOCAL AND THAT'S WHERE
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A PUBLIC
RECEPTION FOR FOLKS TO COME
MEET THE DELEGATION INTERACT.
WE HOPE YOU CAN JOIN US FOR
THAT TOO.
AT THIS POINT EVERYONE'S
PROBABLY PRETTY TIRED.
SO FRIDAY FOR US IS AN ACTUAL
TRANSITION.
I THINK YOU PROBABLY KNOW WE
HAVE A LOT OF FOOTBALL GAMES
GOING ON IN THE FALL AND THE
HOTEL RATES GOT REALLY, REALLY
EXPENSIVE FOR FRIDAY NIGHT.
SO WE'RE TRANSITIONING TO
HOMESTAYS AT THIS POINT IF YOU
HAVE ANYONE IN THE COMMUNITY
WHO WOULD LIKE TO OFFER A
SINGLE NIGHT IN THEIR HOME,
THIS IS VERY CUSTOMARY IN
GERMAN CULTURE FOR PEOPLE TO
STAY IN HOMES.
IT MAY FEEL A LITTLE FOREIGN TO
US BUT THIS IS VERY NORMAL.
WE ARE TRANSITIONING THE TEAM
INTO HOME STAYS WHERE THEY CAN
KIND OF BE MORE COMFORTABLE AND
IMMERSIVE IN A PLACE AND THEN
THEY HAVE A SPECIAL RECEPTION
SPARK FOLLOWING THAT THEY HAVE
AN AFTERNOON FREE TO EXPLORE
AND THEN IT'S SCREEN FAIR.
SO WE'RE GOING TO INVITE THEM
DOWNTOWN TO SEE WHAT IT LOOKS
LIKE WHEN THE COMMUNITY IS SORT
OF ALL TOGETHER IN A SPOT AND
THEY CAN SEE ALL OF THOSE
COLLABORATORS AND ALL OF THOSE
DIFFERENT ACTIVITIES IN ONE SET
PLACE.
>> THEY ARE DEPARTING ON
SATURDAY BUT THEY FIRST GET TO
GO TO U M TAILGATE IF THEY WANT
TO AND THEN THEY'LL BE TAKING
OFF AFTER THE RESIDENT
DELEGATION, HOWEVER, IS THEN
GOING TO MOVE ON TO CHICAGO SO
THEY'RE GOING TO STAY SO THE
OFFICIAL DELEGATION IS GOING TO
GO BACK HOME BUT THE RESIDENTS
WILL STICK AROUND.
>> SO THAT'S OUR FORMAL
ITINERARY AGAIN.
YOU'RE WELCOME TO JOIN US FOR
ANY ELEMENT OF THIS.
THERE'S MUCH MORE DETAILED
ITINERARY THAT'S GOING TO TELL
YOU EXACTLY WHERE IT WILL BE
OTHERWISE I PLAN TO SEND YOU
INVITATIONS TO ALL THE EVENING
RECEPTIONS PLEASE JOIN US FOR
WHATEVER MAKES SENSE IN YOUR
SCHEDULE.
WE REALLY WANT TO SHOW THEM
THAT WE'RE GLAD THEY'RE HERE.
WE WANT TO LEARN FROM THEM AND
THAT TRULY WE'RE UNITED IN THIS
WORK.
QUESTIONS CONCERNS HARBEN NO.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WHILE WE PIVOT OVER TO THE NEXT
TOPIC I WANTED TO SHARE THAT WE
ARE GOING TO INVITE THE CHAPEL
HILL DELEGATION TO JOIN US AT
THE RECEPTION AT OUMA AS WELL
BECAUSE WE THINK THAT WOULD BE
SORT OF NICE INTERSECTION AND
70 PEOPLE NO JOKE.
>> SO THAT'LL BE FUN JACKIE AND
HAVE AN AUDIENCE.
ALL RIGHT.
PIVOTING TOPICS VERY QUICKLY.
WANTED TO SHARE A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT SOME OF THE FUNDRAISING
THAT WE'RE WORKING ON IN OSSI
AND I WANT TO GIVE MILTON A LOT
OF CREDIT FOR THIS.
HE HAS VERY MUCH KEPT US
FOCUSED ON THE FEDERAL REALITY
THAT WE'RE IN RIGHT NOW.
THE LANDSCAPE IS CHANGING QUITE
A LOT AND IT'S NOT CLEAR WHAT'S
GOING TO BE AVAILABLE IN THE
FUTURE.
BUT WHAT IS CLEAR IS WHAT
FUNDING SOURCES ARE AVAILABLE
TODAY.
SO WE'VE BEEN PRETTY
INTENTIONAL IN I ABOUT THINKING
IN TERMS OF WHAT OUR STRATEGIC
NEEDS ARE AND WHAT FEDERAL
GRANTS OR STATE GRANTS MIGHT BE
AVAILABLE.
WE SHOULD PURSUE AND NOT TAKING
FOR GRANTED THAT THEY'LL BE
AVAILABLE NEXT YEAR.
SO THE WAY I STRUCTURED THIS
I'M GOING TO GO THROUGH PRETTY
QUICKLY.
I JUST WANTED TO DO A LITTLE
HIGHLIGHT AND SOME OF THE
GRANTS WE HAVE ALREADY RECEIVED
WHAT WE'RE WORKING ON RIGHT NOW
IN REAL TIME AND THEN WHAT KIND
OF HORIZON PRIORITY ISSUES FOR
US.
SO IN TERMS OF THE GRANTS THAT
WE HAVE SECURED, THE VAST
MAJORITY OF THESE HAVE BEEN
LEVERAGING THE COMMUNITY
CLIMATE ACTION VILLAGE.
SO WE JUST WANT TO GRANT THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE COME BEFORE
YOU SOON FOR A REFRIGERANT
RECYCLING PROGRAM.
IT'S A PRETTY SMALL GRANTS BUT
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS.
BUT THIS IS IMPORTANT BECAUSE
REFRIGERANTS ARE HIGH.
THEY HAVE HIGH GLOBAL WARMING
POTENTIAL WHEN THEY LEAK AND
THEY LEAK ALL OF THE TIME.
THIS IS SPECIFICALLY FOR SMALL
BUSINESSES TO TRANSITION.
THEY'RE EQUIPMENT OVER.
YOU KNOW, WE WANT THE
GEOTHERMAL PLANNING GRANT AND
BRYANT WHAT YOU'LL SEE IN A
MINUTE WE'RE PREPPING FOR THE
SECOND PHASE OF THAT GRANT.
IT'S I HAVE PERMISSION TO TELL
YOU NOW BUT YOU HAVEN'T SEEN
THIS YET OR HAS A PRESS RELEASE
GOT OUT BUT CONGRESSWOMAN
DINGELL HAS SAID IT SO I'LL SAY
IT.
WE WANT TO ROUND TWO OF THE
AMERICORPS PROGRAM AND THAT IS
LEVERAGING THE COMMUNITY
CLIMATE ACTION VILLAGE THAT HAS
BEEN TRANSFORMATIONAL FOR OUR
ABILITY TO GET OUT INTO THE
COMMUNITY.
SO YOU SHOULD SEE THAT GRANT
AGREEMENT SOON.
YOU JUST SAW ON THURSDAY THE
RESILIENCE NETWORK.
THIS WAS THE GRANT FOR THE
RESILIENCE HUB INFRASTRUCTURE
AND THAT KIND
OF INTERCONNECTION BETWEEN
THOSE HUBS AND THE OTHER
PROGRAMS EMERGING FROM IT.
WE DID WIN SOME KOG LED
LIGHTING GRANT THAT LEVERAGES
THE MILEAGE THE SAFE STREETS
FOR ALL I FORGOT TO PUT ON HERE
THAT ALSO IS THE MATCHES FROM
THE COMMUNITY CLIMATE ACTION
COLLEGE FOR THAT PARTICULAR
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE YOUR NEXT
COUNCIL MEETING A US FORESTRY
SERVICE GRANT THAT WE WON FOR A
COMPREHENSIVE TREE CANOPY
ANALYSIS.
SOME TREE PLANTINGS ESPECIALLY
IN UNDERSERVED AREAS AND THE
EXPLORATION OF A TREE AT FOR
WHAT'S THE WORD WHEN I FIND A
NURSERY THAT'S THE WORD A
NURSERY THAT WE MIGHT BE ABLE
TO DEVELOP HERE FOR THE ENTIRE
COUNTY.
IT'S SORT OF AN EXPLORATION
OF IF WE CAN DO THAT I'M REALLY
EXCITED ABOUT THE PROSPECT OF A
POTENTIAL NURSERY TO GROW OUR
OWN NATIVE AND CLIMATES FOR OUR
PLANTS AND WE DID WHEN SOLAR
AWARD TWO POINT FIVE DOLLARS
MILLION TO EXPAND SOLAR AT CITY
FACILITIES AND THEN WE HAVE A
FIVE MILLION DOLLAR AWARD THAT
WE GOT FROM THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN TO DO LANDFILL
SOLAR PROJECTS.
SO NOT BAD.
THESE ARE ALL WITHIN THE LAST
12 TO 18 MONTHS WE'VE SECURED
AND THE VAST MAJORITY OF THEM
ARE IN THE LAST THREE TO FIVE.
THIS IS WHAT MAKES ME CRY
SLIGHTLY.
THESE ARE THE GRANTS ARE
ACTIVELY WORKING ON AT THE
MOMENT.
OH SO WE HAVE TO CHARGING AND
FUELING INFRASTRUCTURE GRANTS
ONE IS A REPEAT OF ONE THE CITY
SUBMITTED THIS IS FOR ABOUT
FIFTY CHARGERS IN ANN THIS ONE
IS IN AND WE'RE WAITING ON
NEWS AS TO WHETHER OR NOT WE'VE
DONE THAT.
WE'RE ALSO WORKING WITH THE
COUNTY THERE THE LEAD ON A
REGIONAL CHARGING GRANT WE WERE
ABLE TO SUBMIT TO.
SO WE'RE PROVIDING A LOT
OF SUPPORT IN GRANT WRITING AND
THE TECHNICAL ELEMENTS.
BUT THE COUNTY IS THE LEAD TO
EXPAND THAT WORK DOESN'T MATTER
IF WE CAN ONLY DO IT IN AN AREA
WHERE WE NEED TO GROW OUR
CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE BROADLY
AND IN THAT GRANT IT WOULD ADD
ROUGHLY TWENTY FIVE TO THIRTY
MORE CHARGERS IN THE CITY.
SO IF WE AND BOTH OF THESE
THAT'S A PRETTY SIGNIFICANT
EXPANSION OF OUR CHARGING
INFRASTRUCTURE BY THE END
OF THIS WEEK GENERAL AND I WILL
SUBMIT A COMMUNITY CHANGE GRANT
TO THE US EPA THIS IS TO FULLY
DECARBONIZE ONE HUNDRED OR
FORTY UNITS OF AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
IT'S A PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE
HOUSING COMMISSION, AVALON AND
OUR OFFICE.
WE ARE REALLY EXCITED ABOUT
THIS PARTICULAR GRANT AND
FINGERS CROSSED THAT ONE
MATERIALIZES.
AND THEN THIS MORNING I TALKED
TO CAN AND TURNS OUT WE'RE
GOING TO DO ANOTHER ONE.
WE'RE GOING TO SUBMIT FOR
BRYANT WORK AND WE MIGHT EVEN
DO A THIRD FOCUSING ON THE
RETURNABLE CONTAINER PROGRAM.
OH, OK.
WE ALSO HAVE A GRANT IN TO THE
MICHIGAN PUBLIC SERVICE
COMMISSION TO DO SOLAR AND
BATTERIES ON EVERY SINGLE
HOUSEHOLD IN BRYANT.
WE ARE A FINALIST WE'LL KNOW IN
SEPTEMBER WHETHER OR NOT WE WON
THAT THAT IS ABOUT THREE POINT
FIVE MILLION IF THAT ONE COMES
IN WE HAVE A DOWI GEOTHERMAL
IMPLEMENTATION GRANT.
THIS IS THE ONE WE'RE ELIGIBLE
FOR ONLY BECAUSE WE ON THAT
FIRST PHASE OF PLANNING FOR THE
BRYANT PROJECT THIS IS A DOWN
SELECT.
THIS GRANT IS DUE IN SEPTEMBER
DETERMINATIONS ON AWARD WILL BE
IN NOVEMBER.
SO IT'S A VERY QUICK
TURNAROUND.
THERE ARE ONLY ELEVEN
COMMUNITIES IN THE COUNTRY THAT
ARE ELIGIBLE FOR THIS FUNDING
SO WE'RE WORKING REALLY HARD TO
LAND THIS GRANT AND THIS WOULD
BE PRETTY GAME CHANGING TO
BUILD A NETWORK GEOTHERMAL
SYSTEM IN BRYANT.
>> WE'RE WORKING WITH THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN ON A
DOWI CONNECTED COMMUNITIES
GRANT ROUGHLY ABOUT THREE
MILLION FOR THIS GRANT AND I'M
SORRY THE GEOTHERMAL GRANT IS
ROUGHLY ABOUT TEN MILLION THAT
WE'LL BE EXPLORING AGAIN MATCH
FROM THE MILLICH THE CONNECTED
COMMUNITIES GRANT IS TO DO THE
HARDWARE AND THE SOFTWARE FOR
THE SECOND PHASE THE SIU HOW
THE HOMES ACTUALLY CONNECT AND
HOW YOU MANAGE THAT SO VERY
SPECIFIC GRANT OPPORTUNITY THAT
ALIGNS REALLY, REALLY WELL WITH
THAT CALL I MENTIONED BEFORE
THE AMERICORPS AWARD WE
ANTICIPATE YOU ACTUALLY HAVE TO
APPLY FOR AMERICORPS AWARDS IN
ABOUT TWO MONTHS FOR THE NEXT
YEAR SO WE'LL START WORKING ON
THAT AGAIN.
WE'RE WORKING WITH SOME OF OUR
PARTNERS IN THE TRADE, THE
TRADES AND WITH COMMUNITY
COLLEGES SUCH AS WCC AND LOCAL
EMPLOYERS ON A GOOD JOBS AND
CLEAN ENERGY PRIZE.
THIS ONE'S PRETTY EXCITING TO
DO IN JANUARY AND THEN WE ARE
IN A DEAL.
WE SAW THAT PRIZE AND THESE
LAST TWO ARE DIFFERENT.
THEY'RE NOT GRANTS.
THEY REALLY ARE PRIZES.
THERE AREN'T CONDITIONS
ASSOCIATED WITH THE FUNDS YOU
APPLY TO FORM A PARTNERSHIP AND
THEN THEY GIVE YOU MONEY TO
CONTINUE THAT PARTNERSHIP AND
THEN YOU CREATE SOME SORT OF A
PLAN AND THEY GIVE YOU FUNDS TO
IMPLEMENT THAT PLAN AND YOU
HAVE A LOT OF DISCRETION IN THE
DENHA WE SAW IT PRIZE.
WE ARE WORKING WITH COMMUNITY
ACTION NETWORK AND WE'VE
ALREADY WE'VE ALREADY WON A
PRIZE THE FIRST PHASE THEN
THERE ARE TWO MORE PHASES AND
ONLY THOSE ELIGIBLE FOR THE
SECOND PHASES ARE THOSE WHO WON
THE FIRST PHASE.
RIGHT.
SO IT'S SORT OF THIS LIKE
FUNNEL THAT GOES DOWN.
SO WE'RE WORKING ON THE SECOND
PHASE FOR THAT PARTICULAR PRIZE
.
OUR INITIAL AWARD WAS FORTY
THOUSAND.
THE NEXT PHASE IS ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND AND THEN IF WE MAKE IT
THROUGH THAT PHASE WHERE
ELIGIBLE FOR THREE HUNDRED
THOUSAND AND ALL OF THAT GOES
TO DECARBONIZING HELMS AND
BRIAN ONE HUNDRED PERCENT IS
JUST ABOUT INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS AND THEN TO CLOSE
OUT THE THINGS THAT WE'RE STILL
SEEKING FUNDING FOR ARE LOOKING
FOR OPPORTUNITIES TO ADVANCE.
WE WANT TO DO A MICROGRID
THAT'S AND FIRE STATION THREE
THIS IS A PRETTY VULNERABLE
AREA OF THE CITY.
THERE'S SOME FEMA GRANT FUNDING
OPPORTUNITIES WE'VE BEEN
PURSUING HERE.
WE HAVEN'T BEEN SUCCESSFUL YET
BUT WE'LL KEEP TRYING.
I AM CONSTANTLY LOOKING FOR
FUNDING FOR THE SUSTAINABLE
ENERGY UTILITY AND DC HAS A LOT
OF OPPORTUNITIES THAT ARE
CLOSE.
WE HAVEN'T QUITE LANDED THEM
YET.
WE'LL KEEP WORKING.
THE RETURNABLE CONTAINER
PROGRAM IS READY TO SCALE.
WE JUST NEED TO FIND SOME
INFRASTRUCTURE DOLLARS TO MAKE
THAT HAPPEN.
WE HAVE TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
DECARBONIZE OUR OWN BUILDINGS.
THAT'S VERY EXPENSIVE TO DO.
A LOT OF PEOPLE DON'T PAY FOR
THOSE KINDS OF PROGRAMS BUT
WE'RE
GOING TO KEEP OUR EYES ON
THE PRIZE AND TRY TO SECURE AS
MUCH AS WE CAN TO MAKE THAT
HAPPEN.
BRIAN IS GOING REALLY WELL AND
I'LL KNOCK ON I THINK THAT
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A
SUCCESSFUL WE'RE GOING TO BE
ABLE TO SAY THAT WE'VE
SUCCESSFULLY DECARBONIZED AND
IT'S GOING TO HAPPEN.
I THINK THERE'S ENOUGH MOMENTUM
THAT I SEE THAT THEN WHAT IS
THE QUESTION WHAT NEIGHBORHOODS
NEXT AND THEN WHAT'S AFTER
THAT?
SO WE'VE STARTED TO WORK WITH
PITTSVILLE VILLAGE TO
POTENTIALLY BE ONE OF OUR
SECOND NEIGHBORHOODS BUT WE
HAVE OTHER NEIGHBORHOODS ARE
ALSO INTERESTED SO WE WANT TO
FIGURE OUT HOW WE FUNDRAISE FOR
THAT.
AND THEN LASTLY WE HAVE TO
FIGURE OUT HOW WE SUPPORT
COMMERCIAL AND MULTIFAMILY
INSTITUTIONS WITH DECARBONIZING
WE FOCUSED A LOT ON RESIDENTIAL
THAT'S ABSOLUTELY APPROPRIATE.
IT'S WHERE MOST OF THE
COMMUNITY CLIMATE ACTION
MILLAGE REBATES AND PROGRAMS
ARE GOING.
THAT'S WHERE THEY'RE TARGETED.
BUT IT'S TIME TO EXPAND TO
OTHER SECTORS.
SO THOSE ARE AREAS WE'RE GOING
TO KEEP LOOKING TO SEE WHERE WE
CAN UNLOCK SOME ADDITIONAL
FUNDING AND WE'RE EXCITED TO
SEE IF YOU HAVE ANY IDEAS AS
WELL.
THANK YOU, MARK.
THANK.
ISN'T THERE ANY QUESTIONS
COUNCIL MEMBER CRONO?
>> I THINK TWO COMMENTS ROUSSOS
QUESTIONS I WOULD LOVE TO SEE
OSSI AS YOU LOOK AT WHAT
COMMUNITIES ARE NEXT TO FOCUS
ON OUR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
COMMUNITIES, I THINK THAT JUST
FEELS LIKE A GREAT INTERSECTION
OF OUR VALUES IN ANN ARBOR.
AND I AM CURIOUS AS YOU LOOK TO
BUILD OUR INFRASTRUCTURE, YOUR
OFFICE HAS PLANS ON MAKING SOME
OF THE CHARGING STATIONS AND
WHATNOT PART OF OUR PLACEMAKING
SO AND PART OF OUR ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS IN TERMS
OF MAKING THEM FREE FOR USE
DURING PEAK TIMES OR ANYTHING
LIKE THAT TO DRAW PEOPLE
DOWNTOWN WHO MIGHT USE THAT AS
AN EXCUSE TO CHARGE THEIR
VEHICLE.
>> YEAH, IT'S GREAT QUESTIONS.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS I DIDN'T
NAME IS THE PARTNERSHIP WE HAVE
WITH THE HOUSING COMMISSION.
ONE OF OUR OUR STRATEGIC GOALS
IS TO CARBONIZED EVERY UNIT
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN THE
CITY.
JEN AND I ARE RUNNING AT LOTS
OF FUNDING OPPORTUNITIES TO DO
THAT.
BUT WE ALSO HAVE I HESITATE TO
CALL IT THIS IT'S THE THE TERM
OF ART IS NATURALLY OCCURRING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
THERE'S NOTHING NATURAL ABOUT
IT.
THERE'S A REASON IT'S PRICE THE
WAY IT IS.
WE NEED TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
HELP THOSE NEIGHBORHOODS TOO.
SO I THINK IF I IM INTERPRETING
YOUR COMMENT RIGHT.
IT'S BOTH OF THOSE THINGS.
YEAH THAT'S RIGHT.
WE FULLY AGREE.
YEAH.
IN TERMS OF CHARGING
INFRASTRUCTURE AND PLACEMAKING
IT'S AN INTERESTING QUESTION.
WHAT I CAN SAY IS WE'VE BEEN
THINKING A LOT ABOUT OTHER
DESIGN ELEMENTS OF THE
INFRASTRUCTURE SO NOT SO MUCH
THE FREE ELEMENTS BECAUSE THERE
IS A COST TO THAT ELECTRICITY
WE ARE PUTTING REQUIREMENTS SO
THAT YOU CAN'T CHARGE MORE THAN
THAT THAT IT IS REALLY ONLY THE
COST OF THE ELECTRIC THE TIME
OF CHARGING.
BUT WE HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT HOW
WE TIE IN LOCAL ART TO THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE, HOW WE MAKE IT
BEAUTIFUL, HOW WE MAKE IT PART
OF OUR PLACE AND THEN OF COURSE
I DIDN'T MENTION THIS HERE BUT
YOU WILL EVENTUALLY SEE FROM US
WE ARE ABOUT TO LAUNCH A
PROGRAM WHERE WE'RE OFFERING
DISCOUNTED CHARGERS AND FREE
CHARGERS ACTUALLY TO COMMERCIAL
MULTIFAMILY SITES TO HANDLE AT
HOME CHARGING FOR FOLKS WHO
LIVE IN APARTMENT COMPLEXES
COMPLEXES FOR EXAMPLE, WHERE
THERE'S JUST NOT AN INCENTIVE
TO INSTALL AND THAT MIGHT BE
LAUNCHED AS EARLY AS NEXT WEEK.
YEAH, ANY OTHER QUESTIONS?
THANK YOU, DR..
NEXT UP, WE WILL HAVE A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN UPDATE FROM
MR. DANKWORTH AND MR. LEONARD,
NEITHER ACTUALLY GOOD EVENING
ON BROTHER TO THE PLANNING
MANAGER.
SOON WE SHOULD BE JOINED BY
STACY CHEN OF INTERFACE STUDIO
WHO WILL BE JOINING US VIA THE
MIRACLE OF TECHNOLOGY AND WE'LL
BE PRESENTING AN UPDATE AS
ADMINISTRATOR TONY INDICATED
WE'RE MIDSTREAM IN OUR
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN PROCESS BUT
WE THOUGHT IT WAS A GOOD
OPPORTUNITY TO GIVE YOU A
SNAPSHOT OF WHAT WE'RE HEARING
SOME OF THE BIG PICTURE GOALS
THAT WE HAVE IDENTIFIED OR
THEMES THAT WE'VE HEARD FROM
PEOPLE.
SO I'M GOING TO TURN IT OVER TO
STACY AND THEN OF COURSE STACY
AND I ARE HAPPY TO ADDRESS ANY
QUESTIONS YOU HAVE AFTERWARDS
AND SEE STACY, ARE YOU THERE?
YOU'RE THERE.
YES.
TAKE IT AWAY.
RIGHT.
HI EVERYONE.
IT'S GOOD TO SEE YOU.
VIRTUALLY SORRY I'M NOT THERE
IN PERSON BUT I AM EXCITED TO
SHARE A BIT OF AN UPDATE WITH
YOU ALL.
I'M GOING TO SHARE MY SCREEN
SLIDE SHOW.
ALL RIGHT.
CAN I GET A THUMBS UP OR
SOMETHING IF I'M THIS IS GOOD.
>> OK, GREAT.
SO IN TERMS OF THE UPDATE WALK
YOU THROUGH THE THREE MAIN
PIECES JUST WHERE WE ARE IN THE
PROCESS, A BIT OF A SUMMARY
OF THE ENGAGEMENT WE'VE DONE
THUS FAR AND THEN WHAT ARE SOME
OF THE EMERGING THEMES THAT WE
ARE HEARING AND THEN FINALLY
WHERE WE'RE HEADED AND NEXT
STEPS?
SO IN OUR TIMELINE WE ARE AS
BRETT MENTIONED PROBABLY ABOUT
HALFWAY THROUGH IF NOT MAYBE A
LITTLE BIT MORE HERE COMING
TOWARDS YOU KNOW, THE LATTER
PART OF THE SUMMER WE HAVE THUS
FAR CONDUCTED OUR INVENTORY AND
INITIAL OUTREACH WHICH WHAT
TOOK THE SHAPE OF ONLINE
SURVEYS WERE LAUNCHED EARLIER
IN THE YEAR AND THEN A SERIES
OF PUBLIC EVENTS THAT WE HAD
BOTH DOWNTOWN AND IN LIBRARIES
ACROSS THE CITY.
AND THEN WE'VE ALSO
PARTICIPATED IN A SERIES OF POP
UP EVENTS OVER THE COURSE NOT
JUST THE BEGINNING OF SUMMER
BUT THAT'S BEEN HAPPENING OVER
THE COURSE OF SEVERAL MONTHS.
SO THAT HAS BEEN GOING ON AND
THEN WE'RE GOING TO BE START
GEARING UP FOR SOME MORE
TARGETED FOCUS GROUPS AS WE
DEVELOP OUR VISION AND OUR
STRATEGIES, WHICH IS WHERE WE
ARE IN THE MIDDLE OF RIGHT NOW
.
>> SO A BIT OF AN OVERVIEW.
>> SOME OF THE ENGAGEMENT HAS
BEEN DONE ONLINE.
SO IN TERMS OF VISITATION WE'VE
HAD OVER NINETEEN THOUSAND
VIEWS OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
WEBSITE WHICH HAS INFORMATION
ABOUT THE PLAN.
ALL OF OUR PRESENTATIONS AND
DATA AND EVENTS AS WELL AS SOME
ONLINE ACTIVITIES ARE ALL TO BE
FOUND ON THIS WEBSITE.
>> THE SURVEY THAT I MENTIONED
EARLIER HAD OVER THREE THOUSAND
PARTICIPANTS AND SO WHAT WE'VE
HEARD THROUGH THAT PROCESS AS
WELL AS WHAT WE'VE HEARD
THROUGH OTHER ENGAGEMENTS ARE
BEING ROLLED TOGETHER INTO WHAT
I'LL BE SHARING WITH YOU.
>> AND THEN FINALLY JUST OVER
THE COURSE OF THE SUMMER, THE
SUMMER GAMES WERE WERE PRETTY
POPULAR MODE OF ENTRY TO THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND WE HAD
OVER 2000 SUMMER GAMES BADGES.
IN ADDITION, THERE HAVE BEEN
ONE ON ONE INTERVIEW WITH
VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND
WILL BE CIRCLING BACK TO SOME
OF THESE.
AND ACTUALLY THERE HAVE ALSO
BEEN SOME ADDITIONAL INTERVIEWS
WE'VE BEEN DOING WITH
COMMERCIAL AND DEVELOPERS AND
DOWNTOWN ORGANIZATIONS AS PART
OF THAT PROCESS.
AND HERE'S JUST AN EXAMPLE
OF SOME OF THE POP UP EVENTS
IT'S BEEN IT'S COMING UP TO THE
NEW GREEN FAIR IN THIS NEXT
MONTH.
THAT'S WHERE WE REALLY KICK
THINGS OFF.
IT'S BEEN ALMOST A YEAR NOW
SINCE THAT THAT THAT STARTED
OUT AND THEN MOST RECENTLY THE
SUMMER FESTIVAL AND ALL
OF THESE ARE OPPORTUNITIES TO
HAVE A DIALOG.
SO WE'VE BEEN ASKING QUESTIONS
THE GREEN SECTOR BUT ALSO
SHARING INFORMATION I MEAN NOT
THE GREEN BAY AT ALL OF THESE
POP UPS AND SHARING INFORMATION
AS WELL.
AND THEN IN THE SUMMER FESTIVAL
YOU CAN SEE HERE THERE'S A BIT
OF LEGO DESIGNING THAT WAS
HAPPENING IN ADDITION TO OUR
INFORMATION AND QUESTIONS AND
THEN AS I MENTIONED BEFORE, WE
HAD A SERIES OF PUBLIC
WORKSHOPS.
THERE WERE SEVEN EVENTS IN
TOTAL.
THIS PICTURE HERE IS FROM THE
DOWNTOWN LIBRARY BUT WE HAD
EVENTS AT BRANCH LIBRARIES AS
WELL.
WE HAD OVER THREE HUNDRED AND
EIGHTY ATTENDEES AND THEN WE
ALSO HELD A SERIES OF SMALL
GROUP MEETINGS AT THESE EVENTS
AND OUR NEXT STEP IS TO TAKE IT
OUT IN WHAT WE ARE CALLING A
MEETING IN A BOX WHICH IS
DESIGNED TO HOUSE SOME OF THE
INFORMAL MATERIALS AND THEN
ALSO A SERIES OF EXERCISES THAT
LEADS PARTICIPANTS THROUGH
QUESTIONS ABOUT HOW IN OUR AREA
SHOULD GROW, WHAT KIND
OF VALUES YOU KNOW, SHOULD WE
BE REINFORCING AND HOW HOW CAN
WE BALANCE DIFFERENT
PRIORITIES?
SO WE HAVE A SERIES
OF WORKSHEETS AND ACTIVITIES
INVOLVED IN THIS MEETING IN A
BOX AND THESE CAN BE
DISTRIBUTED IN A NUMBER OF WAYS
INCLUDING THROUGH COMMUNITY
ORGANIZATIONS.
BUT WE WILL ALSO HAVE SMITH
GROUP WHO IS ON OUR TEAM TO
LEAD THE ENGAGEMENT TO BE GOING
OUT INTO COMMUNITIES WITH THIS
WITH THIS ENGAGEMENT TOOL TO
COLLECT ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
.
>> SO THERE HAVE BEEN A LOT
OF PEOPLE THAT WE'VE TALKED TO
BOTH ONLINE AND THROUGH POP UPS
AND THROUGH THE WORKSHOPS AND
SMITH GROUP AND OUR TEAM AT
INTERFACE HAVE BEEN SIFTING
THROUGH A LOT OF INFORMATION
AND A LOT OF COMMENTS OPEN IN
THE COMMENTS AND TRYING TO
START TO UNDERSTAND, YOU KNOW,
WHAT IS IT THAT WE'RE HEARING?
>> WHAT ARE THE EMERGING THEMES
.
>> SO TO DO THIS WE'VE BEEN
TAKING ALL OF THIS INFORMATION
BUT ALSO LOOKING BACK AT THE
EXISTING PLANS AND ALSO ONE
OF THE ACTIVITIES THAT WE DID
IS TO TAKE THE VALUES THAT
COUNCIL GAVE US WHICH WERE
AFFORDABILITY, SUSTAINABILITY
AND EQUITY AND ASK THE PUBLIC
TO HELP US DEFINE THEM.
AND SO HERE YOU ARE GOING TO
READ ALL OF THESE BUT HERE ARE
SOME OF THE THEMES THAT HAVE
ARISEN AND YOU CAN SEE THERE
DEFINITELY IS A LOT OF OVERLAP
BETWEEN THE DIFFERENT SOURCES.
SO FROM THE EXISTING PLANS THAT
WE'VE BEEN LOOKING AT TO THE
WAY THAT THE PUBLIC
HAS BEEN
DEFINING THE VALUES PUT FORTH
BY COUNCIL AND ALSO TO OUR MORE
OPEN ENDED QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
VISION FOR THE FUTURE OF THE
CITY.
SO YOU CAN SEE THAT A LOT
OF THESE A LOT OF THESE SOURCES
ARE KIND OF COMING UPON SIMILAR
THEMES HERE.
AND SO WE'VE BEEN TAKING THIS
INFORMATION AND TRYING TO
UNDERSTAND OK, SO HOW DO WE
TAKE THESE OVERARCHING VALUES
FOR ANN ARBOR AS COUNCILOR HAS
HAS GIVEN US AND THESE ARE SOME
OF THE QUOTES DIRECT QUOTES
THAT CAME OUT OF SOME OF OUR
WORK AND TAKE THAT BACK TO THE
COMMUNITY.
SO THAT'S ONE OF THE STEPS
WE'VE BEEN DOING IS TAKING WHAT
WE'VE HEARD, BRINGING IT BACK
TO THE COMMUNITY, BRINGING IT
BACK TO OUR STEERING COMMITTEE,
BRINGING IT BACK TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND SAYING
DOES THIS SOUND RIGHT?
I THINK THAT THERE'S VERY
STRONG PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR THESE
THREE VALUES.
WHAT THERE IS ALSO IS SOME
CONVERSATION ABOUT SHOULD THERE
BE A FOURTH VALUE IN ADDITION
TO THESE THREE WE HAVEN'T
LANDED ON EXACTLY WHAT IT IS
YET AND WE'RE STILL
WORKSHOPPING IT AND TALKING
THROUGH WITH OUR STEERING
COMMITTEE.
>> BUT IT SOUNDS LIKE A FOURTH
VALUE COULD BE SOMETHING ALONG
THE LINES OF CELEBRATING WITH
WHAT MAKES ANN ARBOR ANN ARBOR
AND THAT COULD PLAY OUT IN A
LOT OF DIFFERENT WAYS.
SOME PEOPLE TALK ABOUT IT IN
TERMS OF , YOU KNOW, THE
CHARACTER OF THE CITY WHICH MAY
BE SOMETHING MORE PHYSICAL BUT
SOME PEOPLE TALK ABOUT IT IN
TERMS OF THE PEOPLE RIGHT.
>> THE PEOPLE THAT MAKE UP THE
CITY AND THE NEED FOR DYNAMIC
FRESH IDEAS AND NEW PEOPLE, YOU
KNOW, CONSTANTLY REINVIGORATING
THE CITY.
>> SO THIS IDEA OF LIKE A
DYNAMIC, VIBRANT, YOU KNOW, ANN
ARBOR QUALITY IS SOMETHING THAT
WE'RE EXPLORING RIGHT NOW AS A
POTENTIAL FOURTH VALUE TO ADD
TO THESE.
>> AND THEN ANOTHER THING THAT
WE DO DOING WITH ALL OF THESE
THINGS WE'VE BEEN HEARING IS
TRYING TO THINK ABOUT WHAT A
VISION STATEMENT LIKE MIGHT
LOOK LIKE FOR THIS NEXT PLAN
AND THINKING ABOUT LEADING UP
TO 2050.
>> AND WE'VE COME UP WITH A
WORKING STATEMENT THAT'S REALLY
VERY, VERY, VERY SIMPLE.
ON THE ONE HAND A FOR ALL AND
WE FEEL LIKE THAT REALLY IN
READING THROUGH EVERYTHING THAT
PEOPLE HAVE BEEN WRITING ABOUT
THE VALUES AND VISION THAT THE
WORD ALL IS REALLY, REALLY
IMPORTANT AND THE WAY THAT WE
CAN SEE IT PLAYING OUT WITH THE
VALUES IS IN THESE WAYS AND
THESE ARE ALL WORKING WORKING
STATEMENTS BUT STARTING TO
POINT US IN A DIRECTION SO ER
TO FOR ALL IN TERMS
OF AFFORDABILITY WE BELIEVE
THAT ALL PEOPLE SHOULD HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO CALL ANN ARBOR
HOME AND TO DRIVE
SUSTAINABILITY MEANS BEING
COMMITTED TO THE INTEGRATION
OF ALL SYSTEMS SOCIAL BUILT AND
NATURAL IN ORDER TO CREATE A
RESILIENT COMMUNITY AND FINALLY
EQUITY IN ORDER TO ENSURE
ACCESS FOR SERVICES AND
AMENITIES FOR ALL IN ADDITION
TO YOU KNOW, REALLY FOCUSING IN
ON UNDERSERVED COMMUNITIES AND
THEN WE ARE EXPLORING THE
DIFFERENT GOAL AREAS THROUGH
WHICH THIS COULD BE EXPRESSED.
AND FOR US AT THIS STAGE IS TO
START TO HONE IN A LITTLE BIT
MORE WITH US WORKING VISION
STATEMENT AND TO START TO FIND
SOME OF THE GOALS THAT CAN HELP
US ACHIEVE THIS VISION.
AND ANOTHER THING WE'VE BEEN
ASKING PEOPLE IS HOW CAN WE
GROW?
>> AND SO ONE OF THE ACTIVITIES
THAT WE TOOK OUT TO THE PUBLIC
THROUGH THE SERIES WORKSHOP POP
UPS AND ONLINE ACTIVITIES WAS
TALKING ABOUT, YOU KNOW, WHERE
CAN WE BUILD UP A LITTLE BIT IN
IN OUR UNDERSTANDING THAT WE
NEED HOUSING AND GIVEN THE THAT
ALL THE VALUES THAT WE WANT TO
BE ABLE TO BALANCE SO WE GAVE
FOLKS A QUESTION WHICH IS
BASICALLY, YOU KNOW, HELP
FIGURE OUT WHERE IT MAKES
SENSE.
AND SO WE HAD DIFFERENT COLORED
DOTS IN ORDER TO SIGNIFY WHERE,
YOU KNOW, YOU COULD BUILD UP A
LITTLE BIT WHICH WERE AND WE
HAD EXAMPLES OF EXAMPLES THAT
ARE ALREADY IN ANN ARBOR, YOU
KNOW, SO FOR EXAMPLE, THE
ADIEUS OR DUPLEXES IS WHERE YOU
COULD BUILD UP A LITTLE BIT
MORE OR MODERATELY AND THEN
TOWNHOUSES AND THINGS LIKE THAT
AND THEN WHERE YOU COULD BUILD
OFF A LOT SO THAT WOULD BE MORE
MULTIFAMILY AND SO WHAT WE
GLEAN FROM THIS ACTIVITY ALONG
WITH SOME OTHERS ARE ARE WHAT
YOU SEE ON THE LEFT HAND SIDE
HERE.
>> SO I THINK THERE WAS A SENSE
AMONG OUR PARTICIPANTS THAT
MORE TYPES OF HOUSING WERE
NEEDED MORE HOUSING BUT ALSO
MORE DIFFERENT TYPES OF HOUSING
AND THERE WAS A NEED FOR HIGHER
DENSITY.
THERE WAS ALSO A SENSE THAT YOU
NEED TO CONNECT THESE PLACES.
THEY HAVE TO BE MORE WALKABLE.
WHICH DENSITY WOULD HELP?
>> THERE WAS A DESIRE FOR
FOCUSING ON THE RIVERFRONT AND
ALSO THINKING ABOUT EXPANDING
DOWNTOWN AS A AS A GOOD PLACE
FOR HOUSING SOME OF THIS
DENSITY AND THEN THINKING ABOUT
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
PARTICULARLY MISSING MIDDLE
HOUSING.
>> SO THOSE HOUSING TYPES THAT
I JUST MENTIONED DUPLEXES
TRIPLEX IS WHAT FLEXES EVEN
TOWNHOUSES, SOME OF THOSE TYPES
OF HOUSING THAT WE DON'T SEE A
LOT OF I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE
WERE MENTIONING HOW, YOU KNOW,
THERE'S A SINGLE FAMILY HOUSES
WITH YARDS AND THEN YOU'VE GOT
APARTMENT BUILDINGS AND THERE'S
A LOT OF STUFF IN BETWEEN THAT
WOULD BE DESIRABLE.
>> PRESEVO WAS A THEME BETTER
TRANSIT GETTING AROUND IN
DIFFERENT TYPES OF MOBILITY
OPTIONS AND THEN THINKING ABOUT
SMALL NEIGHBORHOODS AND
NEIGHBOR HAD RETAIL SMALL
BUSINESSES, NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL
ALL OF THESE WERE THEMES THAT
CAME OUT OF SOME OF OUR WORK
THUS FAR AND WHAT STARTED TO DO
THEN IS THINK ABOUT HOW COULD
WE HONE INTO THE QUESTION
OF DENSITY AND GET A LITTLE BIT
MORE SPECIFIC SO WE DIVIDE A
SERIES OF WHAT IF QUESTIONS.
SO WHAT IF WE WERE GOING TO
BUILD HOUSING FOR SAY 50
PERCENT OF THE COMMUTERS AND
THEIR FAMILIES WHICH WOULD BE
APPROXIMATELY THIRTY FIVE TO
FORTY THOUSAND HOUSEHOLDS WHAT
IF WE ADDED HOUSING TO THE
SINGLE FAMILY ZONED AREAS UP TO
FOUR UNITS?
WHAT IF WE MAXIMIZE THE
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN DC
ONE DISTRICTS OR OTHER
COMMERCIALLY ZONED AREAS AND
PARKING LOTS?
>> AND THEN FINALLY WHAT IF WE
CREATED ANOTHER DOWNTOWN SCALE
HUB SOMEWHERE ELSE IN THE CITY
FOR EXAMPLE SOMEPLACE LIKE
BRIARWOOD AND WE TOOK THESE
QUESTIONS AND WORKSHOPPED THEM
.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT YOU KNOW
THAT WAS INTERESTING IS A LARGE
NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS WERE
SUPPORTIVE OF ADDITIONAL
HOUSING AND SINGLE FAMILY AREAS
SOMEWHERE BETWEEN TWO TO FOUR
UNITS AND EIGHT ARE ALREADY,
YOU KNOW, AN EXAMPLE OF OF
HAVING TO UNIT ON A SINGLE
FAMILY AREA SO THAT WAS THAT
WAS ONE OF THE THINGS THAT LED
US TO SAY, OK, LET'S SAY LET'S
GO WITH FOUR AND SEE WHAT
PEOPLE SAY.
SO IN THIS IN THIS WHAT IF
SCENARIO BUILDING, WE DID ASK
PEOPLE FIRST OF ALL WHAT DO WE
HAVE TO GAIN?
AND I THINK THERE IS A STRONG
UNDERSTANDING THAT THIS IS GOOD
FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
THE SUPPORTS THE GROWTH
OF UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN WHICH
HAS BEEN A MAJOR SOURCE
OF GROWTH FOR THE CITY AS A
WHOLE.
IT'S GOOD FOR TAX REVENUE.
IT'S GOOD FOR THE MILLAGE FOR
ALL OF THE THINGS THAT WE WANT
TO SUPPORT HIM IN AABA IT'S
GOOD FOR DIVERSIFYING THE
HOUSING TYPES AND ALSO THE
PEOPLE WHO COULD LIVE HERE.
IT COULD BRING MORE BUSINESSES
AND SERVICES AND AND MAKE FOR A
BETTER QUALITY OF LIFE.
BUT WE ALSO WANTED TO ASK
PEOPLE, YOU KNOW, WHAT ARE WHAT
ARE SOME THINGS THAT WE NEED TO
KEEP IN MIND IF IF WE'RE GOING
TO ADD PEOPLE IF WE'RE GOING TO
ADD DENSITY TO BASICALLY ALL
NEIGHBORHOODS AND SO THESE ARE
SOME OF THE THINGS THAT PEOPLE
MENTIONED MAKING SURE THAT
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENTS AND SERVICE
DELIVERY CAN KEEP UP UNDERSTAND
THAT THERE WILL BE A CHANGE
OF CHARACTER AT LEAST IN THE
SHORT TERM.
THE TRANSITION MAKING SURE
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT OPEN
SPACES, TREES AND PERMEABLE
SPACES, NATURAL FEATURES, THOSE
KINDS OF THINGS AND
UNDERSTANDING TRAFFIC
CONGESTION COULD GET WORSE IN
THE SHORT TERM.
>> YOU KNOW, THAT IS SOMETHING
IDEALLY IN THE LONG TERM YOU'LL
HAVE MORE PEOPLE, MORE
WALKABILITY, MORE POTENTIAL
TRANSIT USE BUT IN THE SHORT
TERM IT COULD BE MORE CONGESTED
AND THEN FINALLY, YOU KNOW,
THERE WILL BE MORE RENTALS AS
WELL.
AND THEN WHEN WE TALKED ABOUT
THE WHAT IF SCENARIO FOR TAXI
ONE DISTRICTS FOR COMMERCIAL
AREAS, SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
PEOPLE SAID THAT WERE A GAME
ARE SIMILAR.
RIGHT.
WE COULD HAVE MORE WALKABLE
NEIGHBORHOODS AND BETTER
STREETSCAPE ECONOMIC
DIVERSIFICATION AND
ACCESSIBILITY, CONVENIENCE FOR
PEOPLE WHO ARE LIVING IN THESE
NEW DEVELOPMENTS OR NEAR THESE
NEW DEVELOPMENTS, MORE NODES
OF DENSITY AND AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR A DIFFERENT TYPE OF SHOULD.
WE SAID THAT IF WE WERE TO
CREATE MORE HUBS THAT ARE
SIMILAR TO DOWNTOWN BUT HAD A
DIFFERENT FLAVOR THERE AND THE
THOUGHT THAT, YOU KNOW, IT
COULD BE A VERY DIFFERENT KIND
OF PLACE THAT WOULD BE A LITTLE
BIT LESS STUDENT CENTRIC FOR
EXAMPLE.
BUT ON THE FLIP SIDE, PEOPLE
DID SAY, YOU KNOW, WE NEED TO
KEEP IN MIND THE EXISTING SMALL
BUSINESSES AND THE AFFORDABLE
COMMERCIAL SPACE THAT EXISTS IN
THESE COMMERCIALIZED AREAS NOW
AND TO BE TO BE AWARE OF WHAT
IMPACT IT MIGHT HAVE ON
DOWNTOWNS FROM THE SEA AND
LEGIBILITY AND THEN FINALLY HOW
IT MIGHT IMPACT THE CHARACTER,
THE UNIQUE IDENTITY OF ANN
ARBOR
.
>> SO ALL OF THIS INFORMATION
THAT
WE'VE BEEN HEARING HAVE
BEEN HELPING US TO THINK ABOUT
OK, WHERE ARE WE HEADED COME
FALL WHEN WE START TO THINK
ABOUT SOME RECOMMENDATIONS.
>> SO THERE ARE TWO MAIN THINGS
THAT WE ARE THINKING ABOUT WITH
REGARD TO THE GROWTH SCENARIOS.
ONE BEING TO CREATE ENOUGH
HOUSING IN ORDER TO STABILIZE
PRICES AS AFFORDABILITY IS ONE
OF THE KEY PILLARS AND THE
SECOND ONE IS TO CREATE ENOUGH
HOUSING SO THAT HALF OR MORE
OF AL-QAEDA'S COULD LIVE IN THE
CITY IF THEY CHOOSE.
WE HAD FLOATED THAT IDEA
OF HALF IN THE BEGINNING AS A
WAY TO START THAT CONVERSATION
BUT INTERESTINGLY A LOT OF THE
PEOPLE WE TALKED TO WERE LIKE
WELL WHY HAVE YOU KNOW WHY NOT
MORE WHY ARE WE THINKING BIGGER
AND THAT YOU KNOW, THIS THIS
ABSORPTION OR OPENING FOR
HAVING PEOPLE LIVE CLOSER TO
WHERE THEY WORK WILL PROBABLY
HAVE THE GREATEST IMPACT ON
SOME OF THE CLIMATE GOALS AND
THE VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED
REDUCTION OF OF ANYTHING ELSE
WE DO.
SO THAT WAS AN IMPORTANT POINT
MADE BY MADE BY MANY.
SO IN THE WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT
IS TO SIMPLIFY AND STREAMLINE
THE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS WE'RE
LOOKING AT TAKING THE EXISTING
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAKING
THEM A LITTLE BIT EASIER TO
UNDERSTAND BUT ALSO MAKING SURE
THAT WE PROVIDE FLEXIBILITY IN
THESE DISTRICTS AND THEN
FINALLY THINKING ABOUT AS WE'RE
STREAMLINING THESE DISTRICTS
HOW WE MIGHT MANAGE THE
TRANSITIONS BETWEEN THE
DISTRICTS SO THAT WHILE WE ARE
LOOKING TO GROW WE ARE DOING SO
IN A WAY THAT IS SENSITIVE TO
NEIGHBORHOOD CONTEXT.
AND THE GOAL FOR US THEN ISN'T
JUST IN THE FALL TO TO BE ABLE
TO SHARE SOME OF THESE INITIAL
IDEAS WITH REGARD TO THESE
DISTRICTS AND THEN FINALLY THE
NEXT STEPS WE ARE LOOKING TO DO
SOME FOCUS GROUPS TO DOVE A
LITTLE BIT DEEPER INTO SOME
OF THE TOPIC AREAS WE ARE
CONTINUING TO DO POP UPS AND
INTRODUCING THESE MEETING IN A
BOX AND THEN AS I MENTIONED AS
WE APPROACH THE FALL TO WORK ON
REFINING THE GOALS AND START TO
DEVELOP SOME OF THE DRAFT
RECOMMENDATIONS AND WITH THAT I
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT THERE'S
NO QUESTIONS STOP STOP SHARING
THE SCREEN OR DO YOU WANT ME TO
KEEP IT UP BECAUSE YOU WANT TO
GO BACK TO ANOTHER SLIDE IF IF
YOU WANT TO POP BACK TO ANOTHER
SLIDE YOU MIGHT AS WELL KEEP IT
UP.
>> I GUESS IF THERE ARE
QUESTIONS ARE THERE QUESTIONS
FROM COUNCIL COUNCIL MEMBER?
THANK YOU.
I HAVE A COUPLE OF COMMENTS AND
A AND A QUESTION ONE I'M
ABSOLUTELY THRILLED TO SEE THAT
75 PERCENT OF OUR WORKSHOP
PARTICIPANTS ARE SUPPORTIVE
OF TWO TO FOUR UNITS IN SINGLE
FAMILY AREAS.
>> I THINK IT DOESN'T REALLY
SURPRISE ME BASED ON THE
CONVERSATIONS THAT I HAVE WITH
PEOPLE IN THE COMMUNITY BUT I
DO THINK THAT'S SOMETHING I
WANT TO HIGHLIGHT AND I'M
REALLY, REALLY EXCITED TO SEE
THE OTHER COMMENT I'LL MAKE IS
JUST YOU KNOW, I WAS EXCITED TO
SEE THE INCLUSION HERE FOR
SMALL BUSINESSES AND
NEIGHBORHOOD RETAIL OPTIONS AND
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
GOING TO BE TALKING ABOUT AT
OUR NEXT MEETING HAT TIP TO
COUNCIL MEMBERS SONG FOR DOING
THE HEAVY LIFTING ON THIS.
BUT WE ARE GOING TO BE BRINGING
FORTH A RESOLUTION LOOKING
ASKING THE PLANNING COMMISSION
TO LOOK AT ACEY USE
OF NECESSARY COMMERCIAL UNITS
AND FOR THOSE WHO AREN'T
FAMILIAR WITH THOSE THINK
GRANNY FLATS WHERE GRANNY CAN
SELL SOME JAM OUT YOU KNOW, OUT
OF THE OUT OF THE SPACE OR
MAYBE THERE'S A SMALL CAFE OR
BOOKSTORE OR SOMETHING IN YOUR
IN YOUR LOCAL NEIGHBORHOOD A
THIRD SPACE WHERE PEOPLE CAN
GATHER.
SO I'M REALLY EXCITED ABOUT
THAT AND I THINK THAT THAT GOES
HAND IN HAND WITH THE WORK
THAT'S BEING DONE HERE.
>> THE ONE QUESTION I HAD WAS
WHEN WE HAD OUR STAKEHOLDER
ENGAGEMENT INTERVIEWS I HAD
ASKED ABOUT TRYING TO GET SOME
DATA AND CRUNCH SOME NUMBERS TO
SEE WHERE IN THE CITY AND WHAT
TYPES OF HOUSING STOCK WE COULD
REASONABLY SEE BEING TORN DOWN
AND HAVING A YOU KNOW, A DUPLEX
OR A TRIPLEX BUILT IN ITS
PLACE.
WHAT DO REMEMBER THAT
CONVERSATION?
I THINK THERE SORT OF WHAT'S
THE THRESHOLD OF , YOU KNOW,
THE AGE OR THE CONDITION THE
THE GENERAL MARKET VALUE OF THE
AREA?
JUST TO GIVE PEOPLE A SENSE
BECAUSE I NOTED IN HERE IT
TALKED ABOUT IF WE MOVE IN THIS
DIRECTION WE'LL SEE THE
CHARACTER OF OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
CHANGE AND I I STILL WANT TO
MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE BEING
REALISTIC WHEN WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THAT AND HELPING PEOPLE
UNDERSTAND THAT THIS IS NOT
SOMETHING THAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN OVERNIGHT BECAUSE SO
MANY OF OUR HOUSES ARE IN GOOD
CONDITION AND WE'RE PROBABLY
NOT GOING TO SEE A HOUSE THAT'S
IN GREAT CONDITION BEING TORN
DOWN SO SOMEONE CAN BUILD IT
QUICKLY.
ABSOLUTELY.
AND I DON'T HAVE ALL OF THE
DATA AT MY FINGERTIPS I'M
AFRAID.
>> BUT THAT IS A POINT THAT WE
ARE VERY AWARE OF .
FOR EXAMPLE, THE ADDUS I FORGET
THE EXACT NUMBER BUT IT'S NOT A
VERY LARGE NUMBER OF IDEAS THAT
HAVE BEEN BUILT.
WE HAVE BEEN LOOKING AT AND
LOOK AT WHAT HAS BEEN HAPPENING
AROUND AND YOU WILL SEE YOU
WILL SEE SOME BUT WE CAN WE CAN
WELL TO GET MAYBE IT'S EASIEST
IF WE PULL TOGETHER SOME
OF THAT DATA IN ONE PLACE WITH
REGARD TO THE HOUSING AND THE
CHANGES AND THE TRANSITIONS WE
HAVE ALSO LOOKED AT WHAT WE'RE
CALLING PROPENSITY TO CHANGE IN
TERMS OF DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGES AS
WELL.
SO YOU KNOW, THINGS THINGS ARE
MORE LIKELY TO HAPPEN AS PEOPLE
START AGING OUT INTO A
DIFFERENT LIFESTYLE
OF DIFFERENT NEED FOR HOUSING.
>> WHETHER YOU'RE UPSIZING OR
DOWNSIZING.
SO TAKING A LOOK AT SOME
OF THESE DEMOGRAPHIC SHIFTS AS
WELL.
BUT I THINK YOUR POINT IS VERY
IMPORTANT AND I THINK IT'S
SOMETHING THAT WE HAVE BEEN
SAYING IS THAT ZONING IS GOING
TO ALLOW SOMETHING TO HAPPEN
BUT WON'T MAKE IT HAPPEN AND
SHOULD IT HAPPEN, IT WILL TAKE
I MEAN WE'RE LOOKING AT 2050 A
2050 HORIZON AND IT WILL TAKE
TIME.
IT WILL TAKE TIME.
SO WHEN WHEN I DID MENTION LIKE
THE CHANGE OF CHARACTER, I
THINK IT'S A VERY IT'S A VERY
IMPORTANT PUBLIC SENTIMENT AND
THERE MAY BE PLACES IN THE CITY
THAT FEEL LIKE THEY'RE CHANGING
QUICKLY.
BUT OVERALL I THINK IT WILL BE
A RATHER WELL IT GENERALLY IS A
SLOWER PROCESS.
>> YEAH.
AND I WOULD I WOULD AGREE WITH
EVERYTHING THAT STACY INDICATED
JUST FOR SOME NUMBERS WE FIRST
ALLOWED ACCESS DWELLING UNITS
IN THE CITY IN 2016.
WE'VE MADE SOME MODIFICATIONS
TO THAT OVER THE YEARS.
THE NEXT PRESENTATION WILL
HIGHLIGHT A COUPLE OF THOSE BUT
WE'VE HAD ABOUT FIFTY ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNITS REALIZED IN THAT
TIME.
SO WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THESE CHANGES PARTICULARLY TO
ADDING TWO TO FOUR RESIDENTIAL
UNITS, THAT'S REALLY MINDFUL IN
OUR CONVERSATION THAT THE
PROJECT TEAM LEVEL IS THAT THAT
IS GOING TO BE A VERY SLOW
CHANGE AND A RELATIVELY SMALL
PART OF SOME OF THOSE TARGETS
THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT.
IF WE'RE TALKING ABOUT FORTY
THOUSAND NEW HOUSEHOLDS OR
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT ENOUGH
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT TO
STABILIZE PRICES, THAT'S NOT
GOING TO BE ACHIEVED IN TWO AND
FOUR UNIT CHUNKS IN
NEIGHBORHOODS AS STACY SAID, WE
ARE ALLOWING THAT THAT WILL BE
A RELATIVELY MODEST TO SMALL
PIECE OF THAT.
>> BUT WE'VE ALSO DO WANT TO
ACKNOWLEDGE WE'VE HAD A LOT
OF CONVERSATION WITH THE
STEERING COMMITTEE AND THE
PLANNING COMMISSION TO AN
EXTENT AS WELL THAT THAT'S PART
OF THAT ZONING FRAMEWORK THAT'S
GOING TO COME OUT OF THIS IS
FINDING THE RIGHT BALANCE THAT
SCALE TO ALLOW THAT TO HAPPEN.
BUT I DO WANT TO BE CLEAR BY
DOING THAT THERE WILL BE
NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE CITY THAT
EVOLVE OVER TIME AND THAT'S OK.
THAT'S HOW WE GOT TO WHERE WE
ARE NOW.
AND I THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT FOR US TO SPECIFY
THAT THE GOALS THAT ARE
IMPORTANT TO US AND FIND THE
RIGHT WAY THAT THOSE ARE GOING
TO EVOLVE TO CONTINUE TO
EVOLVE.
>> YEAH, THANK YOU.
I WANTED TO STRESS THAT I
PERSONALLY AM SUPER SUPPORTIVE
OF IT AND I FEEL THAT IT'S A
REALLY IMPORTANT TOOL IN THE
TOOLBOX.
>> BUT I AND IF WE DON'T DO IT
AND WE ARE SEEING CERTAIN
NEIGHBORHOODS I THINK WATER
HILL IS THE BEST EXAMPLE OF A
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT HAS
GENTRIFIED BEYOND BELIEF
BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE THIS TOOL
RIGHT NOW.
>> AND SO THIS IS GOING TO
ALLOW US FOLKS, YOU KNOW, TO
HAVE THE OPTION TO BUILD A
DUPLEX INSTEAD OF A YOU KNOW,
MILLION DOLLARS A MILLION PLUS
MANSION AND TRYING YOU KNOW,
KEEP THE NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER
THE WAY THAT IT HAS BEEN.
>> SO ANYWAY, THANK YOU.
I APPRECIATE THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
COUNCILMAN HASSAN.
THE RESOLUTION COMING FORWARD
WILL IF THE ACTU IDEAS ALREADY
IN THE MASTER OR THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING
CONVERSATION AND I'M EXCITED
ABOUT THE RESOLUTION BECAUSE
I'LL BE ASKING OUR CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TO TAKE A CLOSER
LOOK AND HOPEFULLY MAYBE
PRIORITIZE IT BECAUSE WHO WHY
SHOULD WE WAIT FOR GRANDMAS JAM
OR BEER SHOULD SHE WANT TO
CHOOSE TO SELL, MAKE AND SELL
BEER IN THE NEIGHBORHOODS?
>> RIGHT.
AND ACTUALLY THE HEAVY LIFTING
IS NOW IN THE CITY ATTORNEY'S
OFFICE.
SO THANK YOU, ATTORNEY KOURY
FOR TAKING A LOOK AT THAT.
>> MY QUESTION IS AROUND THE
EXPANSION OF DOWNTOWN AREAS.
SO ARE WE LOOKING ADDITIONAL
TIFE LIVING AREAS COMING
FORWARD?
>> I DON'T KNOW.
SO DEFINITELY WHEN WE WERE
TALKING TO THROW WORKSHOPS
DOWNTOWN WAS AN AREA
WHERE WE
REALLY FOCUSED AND WE ASKED
WHAT IS APPROPRIATE AROUND
DOWNTOWN TO GO UP A LITTLE, GO
UP A MODERATE AMOUNT OR GO UP A
LOT AND THE MAJORITY OF PEOPLE
SAID AROUND DOWNTOWN IS AN
APPROPRIATE PLACE TO GO UP A
LOT.
SO WE'VE I THINK THAT IS ALSO
REFLECTIVE OF SOME OF THE
DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY THAT WE'VE
SEEN HAPPEN IN AND AROUND THE
DOWNTOWN OVER THE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS.
SO I DO THINK THE PLAN IS PART
OF THAT IS GOING TO HAVE TO AT
LEAST POINT TO SOME OF THE
QUESTIONS THAT WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO FACE WITH THAT
SPECIFICALLY WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
POTENTIALLY EXPANDING THE
FOOTPRINT OF DOWNTOWN OUR
DOWNTOWN.
PART OF THE REASON OUR DOWNTOWN
IS SUCCESSFUL BECAUSE OF AN
ELEVATED INVESTMENT IN
INFRASTRUCTURE AND HAPPENS THAT
HAPPENS WITH THAT WHEN WE START
TRYING TO REPLICATE THAT ACROSS
THE CITY WITHOUT THE BENEFIT
OF OTHER FUNDING FINANCING
MECHANISMS SUCH AS TIF, IT
BECOMES REALLY CHALLENGING
BECOMES REALLY AND CHALLENGING
TO PROVIDE THE MAINTENANCE
INVESTMENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
AND WIDE SIDEWALKS EVERYWHERE
ACROSS THE CITY SO THAT WILL
THAT WE WILL HAVE TO LOOK AT
THAT THAT IT'S ULTIMATELY GOING
TO BE OBVIOUSLY A POLICY
DECISION THAT'S GOING TO BE
OCCURRING AT THIS TABLE.
BUT I THINK IT HAS A LOT TO DO
WITH THINGS LIKE WHAT YOU WERE
TALKING ABOUT WITH THE
ACCESSORY COMMERCIAL UNIT, A
LOT OF A LOT OF THE GOALS AND
POLICIES THAT WE'VE TALKED
ABOUT AS A CITY IS A LITTLE BIT
OF LOCALIZATION 15 AND 20
MINUTE NEIGHBORHOODS PROVIDING
MIXED USE OF THE NEIGHBORHOODS
PART.
THIS PLAN MIGHT BE RECONCILING
THE ROLE OF DOWNTOWN AND THE
COMMUNITY AND WITH THAT, YOU
KNOW, MAYBE THAT SUSTAINS THOSE
INFRASTRUCTURE PUZZLES THAT WE
HAVE TO SOLVE OR MAYBE THEY'RE
NOT AS EXTREME IF IF THE
DOWNTOWN ROLE EVOLVES OVER
TIME.
SO I DO THINK THE PLANNING
NEEDS TO ADDRESS IT.
I CAN'T SIT HERE AND TELL YOU
WHAT GEOGRAPHIES SHOULD OR
SHOULDN'T BE INCLUDED YET.
BUT IF WE ARE TALKING ABOUT
EXPANDING THE DENSITY OF IT, I
THINK WE NEED TO TALK ABOUT THE
DDA AS A MECHANISM TO HELP
SUPPORT THE SUCCESS OF IT.
IT'S COME UP BEFORE WHEN WE
WERE SUPPOSED TO REIMAGINE WASH
RIGHT.
>> THAT WAS ONE OF THE IDEAS IS
TO LEVY A CHIP ALONG THAT
BORDER.
>> I KNOW YOU LOOK SO EXCITED
ABOUT IT JUST HAS IMPLICATIONS
TO EVERYTHING.
RIGHT.
YOU KNOW SO YEAH.
BUT I THINK THAT'S A QUESTION
THAT WE NEED WE NEED TO WE NEED
TO LOOK AT YOU CAN'T AGAIN YOU
CAN'T EXPAND AND EXPAND THAT
PATTERN OF DEVELOPMENT WITHOUT
THE INFRASTRUCTURE AND STACY
TALKED ABOUT THAT.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR WHEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT US THERE ARE
OTHER PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTMENTS THAT WE'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO BE RECONCILING WITH THE
CITY.
YOU KNOW, WE HAVE CAPACITY IN
SOME PLACES AND WE HAVE
CHALLENGED CITIES AND OTHER
PLACES SO WE'RE APPROACHING IT
FROM A LAND USE POLICY
PROVISION.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME AND IN
ADDITION TO FINANCE MECHANISMS
,THERE'S GOING TO BE SOME
QUESTIONS MAYBE ABOUT HOW WE
SUPPORT THAT WHAT'S THE FAZING,
WHAT'S THE GEOGRAPHY SO THERE'S
A LOT OF IFS BUT OBVIOUSLY THIS
IS AN IMPORTANT FIRST STEP TO
LAY OUT A VISION.
>> YEAH, THAT'S A SUPER
DIPLOMATIC WAY OF SAYING IT'S
UP TO POLITICIANS.
THAT'S POLITICIANS AND
EXPENDITURES.
YOU KNOW, WE HAVE WE HAVE A LOT
OF NEEDS NOW AND SO AS WE ADD
NEEDS TO THOSE, WE'RE JUST
GOING TO FIGURE OUT HOW WE
ADDRESS THEM.
>> SO SPEAKING OF POLITICIANS,
IF I CAN ASK REIMAGINE
WASHINGTON I WAS SUPPOSED TO BE
A PARTNERSHIP WITH OUR
NEIGHBORS AND ALSO IT WAS A
DISCUSSION THAT WE'VE HAD WITH
THE STATE.
RIGHT.
SO WHEN IN SPEAKING ABOUT
FUTURE POTENTIAL PARTNERS, THE
SCHOOLS I WAS UP NORTH THIS
THIS WEEKEND AND I NOTICED HOW
TRAVERSE CITY HAS A NEW
CONSORTIUM THAT'S THEIR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS, THEIR TEACHERS UNION,
PRIVATE SCHOOLS, ART SCHOOLS,
THE STATE HAS COME TOGETHER AND
THEIR OFFICE OF REAL PROSPERITY
HAS COME TOGETHER TO FIGURE OUT
HOUSING FOR TEACHERS NEXT ON
SCHOOL PROPERTY.
WE ARE SCHOOL ADJACENT.
I UNDERSTAND THAT BUT IF IF
THIS IS TRULY COMPREHENSIVE,
ARE WE HAVING DISCUSSIONS WITH
OUR SCHOOL PARTNERS?
>> YEAH, I CAN SAY NOT SO MUCH
TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THE
SCHOOL DISTRICT OBVIOUSLY HAS A
LOT THAT THEY'RE WORKING WITH
RIGHT NOW BUT WE HAVE HAD SOME
OF THOSE CONVERSATIONS IN THE
PAST GENERALLY PART OF THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WE ARE
STARTING WE ARE THINKING ABOUT
WHAT THE ROLE OF PUBLIC LANDS
ARE.
I THINK THAT'S APPROPRIATE.
THIS BODY HAS SORT OF PUT YOUR
FOOT INTO THAT DOOR WITH
REPURPOSED DOWNTOWN PARKING
LOTS FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
I THINK IT'S APPROPRIATE FOR US
TO LOOK AT THAT CITYWIDE.
WE HAVE A LOT OF PUBLIC LAND
ASSETS AND MAYBE THEY'RE ALL
BEING USED IN THE BEST WAY NOW
MAYBE THEY'RE NOT ALL BEING
USED IN THE BEST WAY NOW
THERE'S A LOT OF POLITICAL
DECISIONS THAT HAPPEN TO THAT
THAT COULD BE SCHOOLS.
IT COULD BE CITY.
SO WE DO ANTICIPATE MAKING SOME
LOOKING AT THE ROLE OF PUBLIC
LAND IF YOU WERE ANY OF OUR
WORKSHOPS NOT INCLUDED IN THIS
BUT WE HAVE A LOT OF TAX-EXEMPT
IN AND THERE'S A LOT OF THINGS
THAT YOU AND THE COMMUNITY
WOULD LIKE TO ACHIEVE.
AND SO WE WE FRANKLY HAVE TO BE
MINDFUL OF THAT BALANCE.
SO NOT SPECIFIC CONVERSATIONS
NOW TO BE CLEAR BUT I
DEFINITELY THINK THAT THERE IS
A COMPONENT OF THIS PLAN THAT
WILL MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS ABOUT
HOW WE SHOULD BE THINKING ABOUT
PUBLIC LAND ASSETS BROADLY.
YEAH, THAT'S HELPFUL.
I THINK WE HAVE CONVERSATIONS
WITH OUR COLLEAGUES AS MUCH AS
WE CAN AND AS PARENTS YOU KNOW,
MANY OF US ARE PARENTS.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT WE'RE
MINDFUL OF AND WHEN WE SPEAK TO
HOUSING WE OFTEN USE TEACHERS
AND NURSES AS EXAMPLES.
SO IF IF THE UNIVERSITY IS ALSO
PART OF THAT PUBLIC LAND
EVALUATION AND MATH, GIVEN THAT
WE'RE ALREADY TALKING ABOUT
LIGHT RAIL AS IF IT'S A
SIMPSONS EPISODE, THEN IT WOULD
BE GREAT IF WE COULD TALK ABOUT
HOUSING FOR FOUR HEALTH CARE
WORKERS AT AND I JUST WANT I
JUST WANT TO BE HONEST TOO.
>> WE HAVE A LOT OF DATA THAT
WE'RE RELYING ON AND MAKING
PROJECTIONS AND SCENARIOS.
THE UNIVERSITY HAS A LOT
OF GROWTH AHEAD OF IT SO THAT'S
GOING TO PROBABLY CHANGE SOME
OF THOSE IMPACTS.
ROAD NETWORKS, INVESTMENT, YOU
NAME IT.
SO WE ARE DOING OUR BEST
CLIMATE MIGRATION.
YOU KNOW, WHEN WE'RE LOOKING AT
THESE SCENARIOS SHOULD THOSE BE
INCREASED BY 50 PERCENT TWICE
SO THERE'S A LOT OF CHALLENGES
AND BUT EVEN JUST STARTING WITH
SOME OF THE DATA THAT WE HAVE
NOW, IT'S BEEN IT'S BEEN REALLY
INTERESTING TO SEE WHERE THEY
COULD GO AND HOW WE SUPPORT
THEM.
>> OK, THANK YOU, COUNCILMAN
MARK.
I APPRECIATE THE POINT ABOUT,
YOU KNOW, ALLOWING FOR TO AND
FOR UNIT HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
IN OUR NEIGHBORHOODS ISN'T
SOMETHING THAT WOULD
NECESSARILY HAPPEN SUPER
DRAMATICALLY AND QUICKLY.
BUT I THINK HOPEFULLY I'M SURE
THAT YOU ALL ARE ALSO
DISCUSSING MINIMUM LOT SIZES
AND THE OTHER THINGS THAT KIND
OF CONSTRAIN THE ABILITY TO
BUILD 80 YEARS AT THIS POINT OR
EVEN LIKE A HOUSE ON A LOT
THAT'S QUITE LARGE.
I WAS KIND OF INTERESTED TO SEE
THE POINT ABOUT CONCERNS ABOUT
INCREASED TRAFFIC CONGESTION.
I'M NOT SURPRISED THAT
RESIDENTS BROUGHT IT UP BECAUSE
WE OFTEN HEAR THAT COME UP AS A
CONCERN.
BUT I GUESS I'M CURIOUS ABOUT
THE TEAMS TAKE ON THAT BECAUSE
FROM MY PERSPECTIVE WE'RE A JOB
CENTER AS WAS HIGHLIGHTED IN
THE PRESENTATION, THE IDEA IS
TO BE ABLE TO HOUSE AT LEAST
HALF OF THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
COMMUTING INTO THE CITY EVERY
DAY.
SO TO ME I MEAN THEY'RE ALREADY
ON OUR ROADS.
>> YEAH.
I MEAN STACY I'LL LET STACY ADD
ANYTHING TO THIS IF DESIRE BUT
I JUST SPEAKING FOR EXPERIENCE
WE'RE KIND OF IN THIS SITUATION
BECAUSE OUR ECONOMIC POTENTIAL
DRIVES THAT CHALLENGE NOW AS
MORE DEVELOPMENT HAPPENS, BE IT
RESIDENTIAL AS THE UNIVERSITY
GROWS, I THINK IT IS REALISTIC
THAT IF HISTORY FOLLOWS THAT
GROWTH HAS HISTORICALLY
HAPPENED AT A FASTER RATE THAN
HOUSING.
SO GRANTED PART OF THESE
SCENARIOS ARE TRYING TO CATCH
UP WITH THAT AND BALANCE THAT.
BUT I THINK IT'S JUST
RECOGNIZING WHEN YOU LOOK AT
THE UNIVERSITY GROWING BEING
HONEST THAT LIKE SAY WE ARE
ABLE TO EVERY YEAR MEET
WHATEVER TARGET TO GET TO THAT
THAT'S IT'S NOT GOING TO SOLVE
CONGESTION IMMEDIATELY.
>> RIGHT.
BUT I THINK THE WAY THAT IT WAS
CHARACTERIZED LAST SLIDE IS
THAT MIGHT BE A DOWNSIDE OF UP
ZONING AND ALLOWING MORE
DENSITY AS STACY AND I TALKED
ABOUT THAT YOU WANT TO ADD.
YES, I THINK YOUR POINT IS IS
SPOT ON AND WHAT WE TRY TO
EXPLAIN BUT THE THE IDEA I
THINK IS THIS COMING FROM A
PLACE OF NOT JUST THE
COMMUTERS?
YOU KNOW, I THINK THERE IS AN
UNDERSTANDING THAT IDEALLY THIS
WILL HELP ALLEVIATE SOME OF THE
COMMUTER TRAFFIC.
BUT THERE IS A SENSE THAT
WITHIN THE CITY BEYOND
COMMUTING TO WORK THERE WILL BE
AN INCREASE OF PEOPLE GOING TO
ALL SORTS OF THINGS IN THE CITY
THEN RIGHT.
JUST MORE RESIDENTS DRIVING TO
WHATEVER THE PARK, THE SHOPPING
CENTER, THE BECAUSE THERE IS A
LAG BETWEEN YOU KNOW, ADDING
ADDING LIKE SAY YOU KNOW,
ADDING RESIDENTIAL MULTIFAMILY
BUILDING AND YOU KNOW, THE
STREET INFRASTRUCTURE ISN'T SET
UP YET.
>> YOU KNOW, FOR YOU TO BE ABLE
TO BIKE EVERYWHERE OR THE BUS
SYSTEM ISN'T FREQUENT ENOUGH
FOR YOU REALISTICALLY HOP ON A
BUS YOU'RE STILL DRIVING.
>> SO I THINK THERE IS THAT
LITTLE BIT OF THAT SENTIMENT
THAT YES, WE UNDERSTAND THE
LONG TERM GOAL IS TO REDUCE THE
VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED WHICH IT
WOULD DO.
>> BUT THE LIVED REALITY IS I
THINK IN IN PEOPLE'S MINDS
THAT, YOU KNOW, THERE'S STILL
PLACES IN ARBOR WHERE YOU HAVE
TO DRIVE AND THERE WILL BE MORE
PEOPLE DRIVING BUT THEY'LL BE
SHORTER DISTANCES.
BUT THAT THERE'S A SENSE THAT
THAT MAY CONTRIBUTE TO SOME
SOME SOME LEVEL OF TRAFFIC BUT
IT MIGHT BE DIFFERENT.
YOU KNOW, THE PATTERNS
OF CONGESTION MIGHT BE
DIFFERENT AND I THINK LET'S NOT
BURY THE LEAD IN HOUSING UNIT
IN THE CITY.
WE OPEN UP THAT OPPORTUNITY.
IT'S SORT OF LIKE WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT TWO OR FOUR UNITS.
IT'S NOT A MANDATE THAT PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO SWITCH THEIR MODE
OF TRANSPORTATION BUT WE'RE
OPENING UP THAT OPPORTUNITY
MUCH MORE THAN THAT SAME
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN EMPLOYEE
LIVING TWENTY OR THIRTY MILES
AWAY.
SO SO I AS STACY SAID, THE
IMPORTANT
THING IS IS THAT THAT
DOES HOUSING UNITS IN THE CITY
DOES DRIVE THAT GOAL BUT IT'S
ALSO GOING TO BRING MORE PEOPLE
WHO ARE GOING TO LIVE THEIR
LIVES.
AND SO I DON'T KNOW, MAYBE IT'S
JUST A FEAR ON MY PART THAT I
DON'T I DON'T WANT TO SIT HERE
AND PROFESS TO YOU THAT IF WE
CAN BUILD 40000 UNITS THERE
WILL NO LONGER BE TRAFFIC JAMS
ON WASHINGTON AVENUE.
BUT THAT'S WHERE IT'S COMING
FROM.
>> THANK YOU.
YEAH.
AND IT'S SHORT TERM I THINK
THERE IS THAT IDEA THAT THERE
WILL BE A SHORT TERM PAIN, YOU
KNOW, BEFORE YOU REACH THAT
CRITICAL MASS.
>> THANKS.
I'VE GOT A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS
MYSELF.
FIRST ON THE OBVIOUSLY
THROUGHOUT WE'RE SEEING THIS
THEME OF AFFORDABILITY AND IT'S
NOT SURPRISING I THINK TO
ANYONE AT THIS TABLE.
BUT I ALSO RECOGNIZE THROUGH MY
OWN CONVERSATIONS WITH
CONSTITUENTS THAT AFFORDABILITY
MEANS DIFFERENT THINGS TO
EVERYBODY AND SO AS YOU'RE
HAVING THESE CONVERSATIONS AND
FOCUS GROUPS, ARE YOU DEFINING
AFFORDABLE FOR FOLKS?
>> ARE YOU KIND OF ALLOWING
THAT TO EXIST IN KIND OF EACH
INDIVIDUAL PERSON'S THE LATTER.
>> I MEAN WE WERE ACTUALLY
TAKING A STEP FURTHER ASKING
PEOPLE WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO YOU
?
AND YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
IT MEANS A VARIETY OF THINGS.
I TEND TO BE HONEST WHENEVER I
SEE IT I TEND TO GRAVITATE
TOWARDS CAPITAL OR CAPITAL,
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS THAT I
KNOW HAVE SOME REGULAR
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK THAT
GUARANTEE THEY'RE AFFORDABILITY
.
BUT IT DOES MEAN A LOT
OF THINGS TO EACH OTHER TO A
LOT DIFFERENT PEOPLE AND I
THINK THOSE SCENARIOS IMPACT
BOTH OF THOSE.
IT'S SUPPLY AND DEMAND MODEL.
IT'S OPENING UP MORE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR DEDICATED
UNITS WHEN WE HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY.
SO DEFINITELY THE LATTER, YOU
KNOW AND I DON'T IT'S A GOOD
QUESTION LIKE WHETHER OR NOT
IT'S IMPORTANT FOR THIS PLAN TO
SORT OF PUT A STAKE IN THE
GROUND AND SAY THAT.
BUT WE HAVE SO MUCH TO
ACCOMPLISH PROBABLY ON BOTH
FRONTS THAT I I THINK IT'S OK
TO LET BOTH COEXIST.
THANKS.
SECOND, THE CONVERSATION AROUND
THE TWO TO FOUR UNITS IN SINGLE
FAMILY ZONED AREAS I GUESS I
WONDER ONE OF THE CHALLENGES
THAT AS STAFF KNOWS WHERE WE'RE
HEARING ABOUT IN ONE OF THE
NEAR CAMPUS NEIGHBORHOODS WARD
THREE RIGHT NOW NEAR CAMPUS
NEIGHBORHOODS FUNCTION A LITTLE
BIT DIFFERENTLY THAN
NEIGHBORHOODS A LITTLE FURTHER
OUT IN THE CITY AND SO THE
TRANSITION AWAY FROM A
TRADITIONAL SINGLE FAMILY HOME
MAY HAVE BEEN A LITTLE BIT MORE
QUICKLY IN A NEAR CAMPUS
NEIGHBORHOOD BECAUSE THERE'S
MORE ECONOMIC INCENTIVE FOR
THAT CHANGE TO HAPPEN AND
THAT'S REFLECTED IN OUR ZONING.
AND I WONDER THOUGH, ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WE'RE SEEING IS,
YOU KNOW, I THINK WHEN A LOT
OF US THINK ABOUT A DUPLEX
YOU'RE THINKING ABOUT KIND
OF LIKE A TWO FAMILY LIVING
SITUATION AND IN SOME OF THOSE
NEAR CAMPUS NEIGHBORHOODS
YOU'RE SEEING WHERE YOU MAY
HAVE TWO UNITS BUT REALLY THERE
ARE 10 PLUS STUDENTS LIVING IN
A SINGLE UNIT BECAUSE THEY'RE
BUILT TO HAVE REALLY KIND
OF SUB UNITS WITHIN A UNIT AND
AND ARE WE ARE WE THINKING AT
ALL DIFFERENTLY ABOUT KIND
OF CAMPUS AREA VERSUS OTHER
PARTS OF THE CITY OR ARE WE
THINKING ABOUT IT KIND
OF HOLISTICALLY THROUGHOUT?
>> I WOULD SAY HOLISTICALLY SO
FAR BUT I LIKE WHAT YOU'RE ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT YOU'RE
DESCRIBING IS VERY MUCH AN
OUTCOME OF SOME OF THE
REGULATIONS THAT WE'VE PUT IN
PLACE.
WE HAVE WE HAVE RESTRICTED A
LOT OF OUR HOUSING
OPPORTUNITIES AND ADDED A LOT
OF REGULATIONS WHICH DRIVES A
LOT OF SOME OF THAT CONVERSION
THAT YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
THINGS LIKE HISTORIC HOMES
BEING SORT OF TRIED TO MAXIMIZE
TWO SIX BEDROOM UNITS BECAUSE
WE DON'T PROVIDE A LOT
OF FLEXIBILITY FOR THAT.
SO TO DATE WE HAVEN'T TALKED
MUCH ABOUT DIFFERENTIATE THAT
FROM NEIGHBORHOOD TO
NEIGHBORHOOD PERSPECTIVE BUT I
THINK SOME OF THAT FRANKLY WILL
ALSO COME OUT OF THE CONTEXT
OF SORT OF THAT LOW, MODERATE,
HIGH POTENTIAL FOR DEVELOPMENT
GROWTH.
WE THINK STACY TALKED ABOUT IT
BUT ONE OF YOUR DIRECTIONS TO
US WAS ALSO TO TRY AND REDUCE
THE NUMBER OF ZONING DISTRICTS
TO MAKE IT EASIER TO UNDERSTAND
MORE FLEXIBLE.
AND SO I THINK THAT'LL PROBABLY
BE A PART OF THAT IS I DON'T
KNOW HOW HOW LOW WE'LL GET.
I DON'T KNOW IF WE'LL GET BACK
TO OUR ORIGINAL FOUR FROM
NINETEEN TWENTY THREE BUT YEAH
IT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
WE CAN LOOK AT IT.
WE HAVE NOT DIFFERENTIATED YET
BUT THAT'S SOMETHING WE
CONSIDER AS WE'RE PUTTING FORTH
THAT FRAMEWORK.
>> THANKS.
THERE'S I THINK THE SCALE
ISSUES MIGHT BE VERY SIMILAR
BUT I SEE WHAT YOU MEAN THE
PROXIMITY MIGHT BE DIFFERENT.
>> YEAH AND THEN I THINK THE
LAST THING I HAD WAS REALLY
JUST MORE OF A COMMENT AND
REALLY APPRECIATED KIND
OF SEEING IN A FEW PLACES
REALLY KIND OF THIS EMPHASIS ON
PLACEMAKING AS WELL AND A SENSE
OF PLACE AND SEEING THINGS LIKE
A LIVELY RIVER FRONT AND AND
DOWNTOWN AND THINGS LIKE THAT I
THINK ARE REALLY IMPORTANT.
AND I THINK FROM MY PERSPECTIVE
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I THINK
A LOT OF RESIDENTS WHO ARE
MAYBE A LITTLE HESITANT WITH A
LOT OF THE CHANGES THAT ARE
HAPPENING AROUND THE CITY COMES
FROM A FEELING OF LOSS
OF PLACE.
AND SO I THINK IT'S REALLY
IMPORTANT FOR US TO CONTINUE
ENTERING THAT IN OUR IN OUR
CONVERSATIONS AS WE THINK ABOUT
THE FUTURE OF OUR CITY AND WHAT
YOU KNOW, A LIVELY DOWNTOWN AND
A PLACE WHERE PEOPLE WANT TO
SPEND THEIR TIME LOOKS LIKE AND
SO YOU KNOW, I GET EXCITED
ABOUT WHEN WHEN WE HAVE
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT MAIN STREET
AND HOW MUCH OF A SUCCESS THAT
HAS BEEN WHEN IT'S CLOSED ON
WEEKENDS AND HOW WE CAN MAKE
THAT YOU KNOW, MORE PERMANENT
AND HAVE THESE SENSE THESE
PLACES FOR PEOPLE TO BE AND
REALLY CELEBRATE OUR CITY.
AND SO THANKS FOR THAT FOCUS IN
THERE AS WELL.
>> ARE THERE OTHER QUESTIONS
COUNCIL MEMBERS ON JUST ONE
LAST QUESTION ABOUT THE ADA USE
THE BARRIERS TO BUILDING THE
ADA USE IS THERE JUST FINANCING
COME UP?
IS THAT IS THERE SOME WAY THAT
WE CAN TALK ABOUT HOW OUR GUIDE
FOLKS YOU HAVE FINANCING CAN
LOOK LIKE AND WHAT OR WHAT
PARTNERS THEY CAN LOOK INTO?
>> YEAH, I PRESUME FINANCING I
DON'T HAVE A DIRECT
CONVERSATION WITH A LOT
OF APPLICANTS BUT I WOULD
PRESUME THAT IS A BIG PIECE
OF IT.
RECENTLY WE UNFORTUNATELY WE
WEREN'T SUCCESSFUL BUT WE WERE
ONE OF THE COMPONENTS OF A
RECENT APPLICATION GRANT
APPLICATION WE MADE WAS ALSO
THE NOTION OF MAYBE PRE
DESIGNING MADE TO USE LIKE I
THINK WOULD BE REALLY FANTASTIC
TO BE ABLE TO HAVE LIKE A
DOWNLOADABLE PLAN TO TAKE AWAY
A LITTLE BIT OF THAT UPFRONT
DESIGN COST FROM FROM FOLKS.
BUT I THINK FINANCING IS
PROBABLY PART OF IT, PROBABLY
PART OF IT'S JUST EDUCATION
UNDERSTANDING WHAT THE TAX
IMPLICATIONS IS GOING TO GOING
TO MIGHT BE OR AND MIGHT NOT BE
.
BUT IT'S ALSO YEAH.
IT'S ALSO JUST REALLY NOT VERY
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT AND COSTLY
TO BUILD RIGHT NOW.
SO I WOULD SAY THAT PROBABLY
JUST FINANCING COSTS ARE
PROBABLY THE BIGGEST BARRIERS
RIGHT NOW.
I DON'T THINK IT'S THE ZONING
REGULATION.
I DON'T THINK WE'VE HAD SOME
SUCCESS.
WE COULD ALWAYS LOOK TO OPEN
THAT UP FURTHER.
I'M SURE THAT THERE ARE SOME
LEVERS BUT IT'S PROBABLY IT'S
PROBABLY FINANCING PRIMARILY.
BUT I'M SPECULATING THAT MAYBE
YOU'VE HAD SOME MORE
CONVERSATIONS WITH NEIGHBORS
ABOUT THAN I HAVE, HUH?
>> I THINK THE WIDOWS ON MY
BLOCK ARE THERE.
THEY'RE NEVER THEY'VE BEEN
THERE.
THEY ARE NEVER LEAVING.
YEAH.
I'M NEVER LEAVING.
>> I HAVE A HALF PIPE IN MY
BACKYARD SO I GET STUCK.
I DON'T HAVE ROOM FROM AIDOO
EVEN IF I WANTED ONE BUT I DO I
BRING THAT UP BECAUSE YOU KNOW
I MEAN WHEN WE WHEN WE CHANGED
OR UPDATED THE ADA ZONING, ONE
OF THE THINGS I HAD REALLY
PUSHED FOR WAS THE VOTE FOR THE
NOT REQUIRING HOMEOWNER
OCCUPANCY RATE THAT WAS JUST
BASED OFF OF A THEY RP'S ADVICE
ON EIGHTY.
SO I DON'T KNOW IF FOLKS AREN'T
READING THE AARP POLICY
DOCUMENTS ARE OUT THERE.
I REALLY RECOMMEND IT.
THERE ARE A LOT OF IT'S LIGHT
READING.
IT'S EXCELLENT.
BUT YOU KNOW, IS THERE ANY WAY
THAT IN OUR CONVERSATIONS WITH
THE COMMUNITY WE CAN ACTUALLY
HAVE RESOURCES FOR FOLKS TO
FOLLOW UP ON IF YEAH.
>> I MEAN I THINK THAT'S
PROBABLY LIKE FINANCING LIKE
DESIGNS.
THERE IS MORE I'M SURE WE COULD
DO TO ADVOCATE BUILDING SIDE
OF IT AND EDUCATION SIDE
HONESTLY MOST MY WORK HAS BEEN
ON THE REGULATORY SIDE.
I DO WANT TO MAKE SURE IT'S
JUST CLEAR FOR EVERYBODY THAT
OWNERSHIP IS NOT CURRENTLY
REQUIRED.
I KNOW YEAH.
SO YEAH I THINK THERE ARE
COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE HAD MORE
SUCCESS ARE THEY TO USE
OBVIOUSLY THAN WE HAVE MOST
OF THEM DO GET INVOLVED IN THE
FINANCING SIDE WHETHER IT'S
SUBSIDIZING IF THEY'RE KEPT
AFFORDABLE OR JUST GENERAL
FINANCING PARTNERSHIPS WITH
BANKS WE HAVEN'T GOT THERE BUT
WE CERTAINLY COULD AND THAT
MIGHT BE A CONVERSATION NOT
ONLY FOR YOU TO USE BUT FOR TWO
TO FOUR UNITS AND RESIDENTIAL
AREAS.
>> YEAH, I'D HATE FOR IT TO SIT
WITH IT WITHIN THESE CHAMBERS
AND ACTUALLY SEE IN COMMUNITIES
I KNOW THE MICHIGAN MUNICIPAL
LEAGUE OR THE MICHIGAN
MUNICIPAL YOU ACTUALLY HAD A
PATTERN BOOK ON HOMES, HOMES
THEY HAD PUBLISHED I THINK TWO
YEARS AGO AND AN UPDATE THIS
YEAR.
SO CONVERSATIONS ARE OUT THERE
AT LEAST ON THE URBAN PLANNING
WORLD BUT ACTUALLY IN THE HANDS
OF NEIGHBORS THAT'S THAT'S AND
QUIETLY BEEN THE COMPREHENSIVE
AND I WOULD I WOULD SAY IT'S
BEEN HELPFUL TO BRIDGE THAT
WE'VE HAD A LOT OF EDUCATION, A
LOT OF CONVERSATIONS.
I THINK THAT SEVENTY FIVE
PERCENT IS SOMEWHAT INDICATIVE
OF MAYBE THERE'S JUST MORE
PEOPLE TURNING OUT ON PLANNING
STUFF THAN HISTORICALLY HAS
BEEN.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL AND
UNLESS SOMEBODY HAS SOMETHING
PRESSING WE'LL PROBABLY LEAVE
IT WITH HER SO WE CAN GET TO
OUR LAST, ISN'T IT?
>> YES.
I THINK I JUST WANT TO CLARIFY
THAT MY BUT MY ASSUMPTION IS IS
ACTUALLY CORRECT IS THAT THIS
PIGGYBACKING OFF OF COUNCIL
MEMBER EICHMANNS QUESTION ABOUT
INCREASED TRAFFIC AND VEHICLE
TRAFFIC.
BUT MY ASSUMPTION IS THAT PART
OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS THAT
COME BACK WILL CONSIDER THINGS
LIKE ACSU AND REALLY BUILDING
UP OUR TRANSIT CORRIDORS AND
WHATNOT TO SORT OF MATCH THE
DIRECTION FROM THE COMMUNITY
AROUND SUSTAINABILITY AS BEING
A CORE VALUE WITH ALSO OUR
DENSITY GOALS.
>> IS THAT A FAIR THAT I
INTERPRET THAT CORRECTLY 100
PERCENT JUST AS AN EXAMPLE WHEN
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT RESIDENTIAL
ZONES THAT'S SOMETHING WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT AS A TEAM TO THAT
WE'VE ALREADY HAD A LOT
OF COMMUNITY CONVERSATION ABOUT
INTEGRATING BUSINESS
NEIGHBORHOOD BASED BUSINESSES
IN ORDER TO DO THAT IS ALLOWING
COMMERCIAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL
ZONING DISTRICTS.
SO ABSOLUTELY THAT'S ALL
OF THOSE THINGS ARE DEFINITELY
PART OF WHAT WE'RE LOOKING AT.
>> I'M SO EXCITED ABOUT THAT.
AND I THINK THE OTHER THING
THAT I'M ASSUMING AS WELL IS
THAT FROM AN EQUITY LENS WE'RE
ALSO CONSIDERING THE CAPITAL
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PIECE AS
PART OF OUR COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
UPDATE SO THAT IT IS MORE
GEOGRAPHICALLY DISPERSED
THROUGHOUT THE CITY SO THAT WE
ARE ALLOWING ACCESS TO OTHER
PARTS OF THE CITY FOR
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TENANTS.
YES, AND I WOULD HONESTLY SAY
THAT'S A GREAT OPPORTUNITY IN
CONNECTION WITH PUBLICLY OWNED
LAND US A LOT OF AGENCIES TO
DECIDE THE GEOGRAPHY ABOUT AND
HOW WE WANT TO PROGRAM LAND.
>> THAT'S FANTASTIC.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU MR. LEONARD.
THANK YOU MISS CHEN FOR JOINING
US.
I APPRECIATE THIS CONVERSATION
.
MR. LEONARD, ARE YOU LEADING
OFF THE NEXT ONE AS WELL?
I AM.
THEN WE WILL MOVE ON TO OUR
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW UPDATES IF I
CAN FIND IT
.
JACKIE DENHA MARCUS HIGHTAILS
SORRY
.
YEAH YEAH I JUST BOUGHT THE
AGENDA
.
NO.
I'M PAULA MAYBE OFF THE IS IT A
PEDIA
LET'S DO THIS
.
IT'S NOT GOING TO BE NEARLY AS
EXCITING
.
WE'LL GO WITH IT
YOU
OK?
I'M SORRY ABOUT THAT.
UH SO WE JUST TALKED A LOT
ABOUT THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
THERE'S GOING TO BE A LOT
OF RECOMMENDATIONS THAT COME
OUT OF THAT BUT WE HAVEN'T BEEN
STANDING STILL ABOUT THE
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCESS.
SO I JUST WANTED TO TAKE A FEW
MINUTES, JUST SHARE WHAT'S BEEN
HAPPENING OVER THE LAST SEVERAL
YEARS TO MAKE SURE YOU KNOW
THAT IT'S WE'RE NOT WAITING ON
A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO TO
BECAUSE THERE'S A LOT OF THINGS
ARE GOING TO GO INTO MEETING
THESE GOALS NOT ONLY THE
POLICIES OF COURSE, BUT ALSO
THE PROCESS THAT WE CAN
FACILITATE AND HELP TO GET AS
MUCH DONE AS POSSIBLE.
SO FIRST OFF, OBVIOUSLY I'M
TALKING ABOUT FOCUSING ON A LOT
OF THE WORK THAT THE PLANNING
SERVICES TEAM IS DOING BUT WE
DO IT WITH A LOT
OF COLLABORATION THROUGH A LOT
OF DEPARTMENTS ACROSS THE CITY
.
BUT ONE OF THE THINGS THAT A
COUPLE OF THE MORE THE CUSTOMER
FACING IMPROVEMENTS THAT WE'VE
MADE RECENTLY HAS BEEN TO
IMPLEMENT A CONCEPT MEETING
REQUEST FORM.
THIS HAS BEEN REALLY HELPFUL
FOR US TO SORT OF RIGHT SIZE
THE RESPONSE TO PETITIONERS AND
PROPERTY OWNERS ABOUT WHAT
THEY'RE LOOKING FOR.
BEFORE WE WERE SORT OF MINING
EMAILS AND PHONE CALLS WITH
PEOPLE CONSTANTLY WANTING TO
SET UP MEETINGS TO TALK ABOUT
CONCEPTS.
THIS IS ALLOWING US TO BE
FRANKLY A LOT MORE RESPONSIVE
BECAUSE WE CAN GET QUICK
RESPONSES OUT TO PEOPLE WHO
ONLY HAVE A QUICK QUESTION AND
THEN SPEND THE TIME ON THOSE
THAT ARE REALLY WANTING TO
EXPLORE A LARGER CONCEPT OR
QUESTIONS ABOUT A MORE COMPLEX
DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL.
SO THAT'S BEEN REALLY HELPFUL.
WE JUST PUBLISHED A NEW FISHEYE
TO ADD A LOT MORE TRANSPARENCY.
I CAN'T SAY THAT IT REDUCED THE
FEES BUT IT PROVIDES A LOT MORE
TRANSPARENCY ABOUT WHAT YOU'RE
PAYING FOR WHEN YOU MAKE THOSE
APPLICATIONS AND WE'RE
IMPROVING A LOT OF GUIDES SUCH
AS CHECKLISTS TO HELP
PETITIONERS WE WORK WITH BOTH I
WOULD SAY MORE AND EXPERIENCE
WITH OUR SYSTEM AND EXPERIENCE
AND PEOPLE STILL WE STILL MISS
ITEMS AND WE STILL HAVE SOME
BREAKDOWNS IN COMMUNICATION.
SO WE'RE DOING ALL WE CAN TO
HELP PEOPLE SUCCESSFULLY GET TO
THE BOTH IN THE DOOR TO START
THE REVIEW PROCESS AND
OF COURSE TO THE CULMINATION BE
A DECISION AS QUICKLY AS
POSSIBLE.
THE ONLINE STREAM SYSTEM IT'S
BEEN ACTIVE SINCE TWENTY TWENTY
TWO AND AGAIN THIS HAS A LOT
OF BENEFITS ACROSS THE
ORGANIZATION FOR A LOT
OF DIFFERENT DISCIPLINES BUT
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
PROCESS WE'RE SPENDING A LOT
OF TIME TO MAKE SURE THAT
OF COURSE THAT IT'S ACCURATE
FOR CONSISTENCY WITH BOTH
PETITIONERS AND THE PUBLIC.
WE'VE CREATED A PUBLIC FACING
DEVELOPMENT TRACKER.
THIS WAS SORT OF A PETITION'S
UNDER REVIEW MECHANISM THAT
FELL OUT OF OUR PREVIOUS SYSTEM
DUE TO THE SYSTEM BECOMING
OUTDATED.
SO WE'VE BEEN ABLE TO RESURRECT
THAT PEOPLE CAN SEE WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN DIFFERENT
GEOGRAPHIES OF THE CITY, CLICK
ON IT AND FIND OUT THE STATUS
OF IT.
>> DIGITAL ONLINE PLAN
SUBMITTAL AND PAYMENT IT SEEMS
LIKE ROUTINE AT THIS POINT BUT
IT WAS ONLY IN TWENTY TWENTY
TWO THAT YOU COULD ACTUALLY PAY
FOR AN APPLICATION WITH A
CREDIT CARD ON THE CITY'S
WEBSITE BEFORE THAT YOU'RE
BRINGING IN A CHECK.
WE HAVE PEOPLE WHO ARE
ALLOCATING THAT CHECK AND
DEPOSITING IT TO DIFFERENT
ACCOUNTS SO THAT'S BEEN A HUGE
IMPROVEMENT NOT ONLY FOR THE
PAYMENT BUT ALSO THE ONLINE
SUBMITTAL WERE COMPLETELY
PAPERLESS NOW.
SO THAT'S BEEN GREAT FOR
SHARING INFORMATION.
WE'VE ESTABLISHED PROJECT
DASHBOARDS, OUR PROJECT FILES
MAYBE YOU SEEN THEM WHEN YOU'RE
HUNTING AROUND OR WORKING WITH
YOUR CONSTITUENTS TO ANSWER A
QUESTION ABOUT A PROPOSAL THESE
ARE BASICALLY A BIG BUCKET THAT
ALL THE VARIOUS APPLICATIONS
RELATED TO THAT DEVELOPMENT ARE
CONNECTED TO.
SO IT'S A GREAT WAY FOR PEOPLE
TO UNDERSTAND EVERYTHING FROM
THE SITE PLAN TO BUILDING
PERMITS ASSOCIATED WITH THAT
PROJECT.
THAT'S A THAT'S BEEN VERY
HELPFUL ALSO FOR US TO BE
COMMUNICATING AMONG OURSELVES
AND OTHER DEPARTMENTS TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE CONNECTING
THINGS APPROPRIATELY AND IT'S
WE'RE NOT DONE STREAM IS GOING
TO BE AN ONGOING PROCESS LIKE
ANY SYSTEM AND WE'RE CONTINUING
TO MAKE UPDATES TO MAKE OUR
APPLICATIONS MORE USER
FRIENDLY, MAKE SURE WE'RE
FOCUSING ON THE INFORMATION WE
NEED NOT ON THE INFORMATION.
WE DON'T NEED TO MAKE SURE THAT
IT'S AS EASY AND PAIN FREE AS
POSSIBLE FOR PEOPLE BEHIND THE
SCENES IN OUR DEPARTMENT WE
LARGELY THANKS TO THE FANTASTIC
DEPUTY PLANNING MANAGER AND
KELLY WE'VE GREATLY IMPROVED
OUR INTERNAL PRODUCT TRACKING
SYSTEM THAT'S HAD SUCH SUCCESS
THAT OTHER DEPARTMENTS ARE
STARTING TO SORT OF LOOK OVER
OUR SHOULDER THAT TO GET
INFORMATION ON ON THAT SYSTEM
AND JUST SIMPLE THINGS WE'VE
STARTED RECONVERSION CONVERTING
SOME OF OUR SORT OF CROSS
DEPARTMENT MEETINGS TO AS
PLACEHOLDERS SO WE CAN GET
PEOPLE IN FOR PRE SUBMISSION
MEETINGS, PETITIONERS AND MORE
QUICKLY.
SOMETIMES IT CAN BE CHALLENGING
TO GET A BROAD SCHEDULING
OF DIFFERENT
PEOPLE ACROSS THE
ORGANIZATION WE'RE SORT
OF BUILDING IN THESE CALENDAR
HOLDS WHICH HAS BEEN REALLY
HELPFUL TO MOVE THOSE PROJECTS
ALONG MORE QUICKLY.
SO THOSE ARE JUST A FEW OF THE
SORT OF PROCESS WHAT I WOULD
SAY THE PROCESS IMPROVEMENTS
BUT WE'RE ALSO MAKING
REGULATORY CHANGES AND SO I
JUST WANT TO HIGHLIGHT SOME
CHANGES THAT WE'VE MADE OVER
THE LAST SEVERAL YEARS TO THE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE .
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE THESE CODED
IN A SIMILAR GREEN, YELLOW AND
RED THAT DR. STULTS INDICATED
PREVIOUSLY AND DURING HER
PRESENTATION.
I JUST WANT TO JUST BE CLEAR
THESE ARE SORT OF MY TAKE ON
HOW I THINK THAT THEY HAVE
EITHER MADE THE DEVELOPMENT
PROCESS EASIER, NEUTRAL OR MORE
DIFFICULT THAN THE CITY HERE IN
TWENTY NINETEEN WE ALLOWED FOOD
TRUCKS ALLOWED FRONT PORCHES TO
EXTEND TO REQUIRED FRONT SET
BACKS.
THOSE TWO WERE BASED ON A LOT
OF INQUIRIES WE WERE GETTING.
WE WERE GETTING TONS
OF QUESTIONS AND SO WE
RESPONDED.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT THE
COMMUNITY IS EXPRESSING THEY
WANTED AND SO WE MADE THE
CHANGES ALLOWING THE
INTEGRATION OF RESTAURANTS AND
BARS AND OFFICE DEVELOPMENTS.
THIS IS JUST ANOTHER EVOLUTION
OF THE CITY BECOMING MORE
MIXED-USE FRIENDLY.
THOSE ARE GREAT AMENITIES TO
HAVE AND A LARGE OFFICE
BUILDING, A CAFE OR A
RESTAURANT AND SO A GREAT
ADDITION IN TWENTY NINETEEN
THOUGH WE ALSO MODIFIED OUR
PREMIUMS.
PRIOR TO THAT WE WEREN'T
GETTING ANY CAPITAL A
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNITS AS
PART OF OUR PREVIOUS PREMIUM
PREVIOUS PREMIUM STRUCTURE AND
SO WE MADE SOME CHANGES.
IT MADE IT MORE DIFFICULT, IT
MADE IT MORE DIFFICULT TO
DEVELOP HOUSING DOWNTOWN AND
THEN WE ALSO QUICKLY
ESTABLISHED THE PROVISION
OF RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA USES
IN THE CITY AFTER THE STATE
LEGISLATION WAS APPROVED.
TWENTY TWENTY WE MADE SOME
CHANGES TO OUR SITE PLAN
CONTENT REQUIREMENTS AGAIN
FOCUSING ON CHECKLISTS THAT
REALLY DIDN'T HAVE ANY POSITIVE
OR NEGATIVE IMPACT.
IT WAS JUST HOPEFULLY
CLARIFYING THE INFORMATION A
LITTLE BIT BETTER.
WE ADOPTED A NEW SIGN ORDINANCE
THAT'S CONTENT NEUTRAL BEFORE
WE HAD DIFFERENT SIGN
REGULATIONS.
IF YOU WERE A POLITICAL SIGN,
IF YOU WERE A REAL ESTATE SIGN,
IF YOU WERE A COMMERCIAL SIGN
AND SO THAT'S ALL BEEN
CONSOLIDATED INTO A SINGLE SORT
OF PHYSICAL SIGN REGULATED
REGULATION AND WE RECOGNIZE
OTHER COMMUNITY GOALS.
>> WE PROVIDED HIDE EXCEPTIONS
FOR SOLAR ON ROOF PANELS SO
THAT BUILDINGS THAT MAY HAVE
BEEN BUILT TIGHT TO A PREVIOUS
LIMIT WANTED TO PUT ROOFTOP
SOLAR.
LET'S MAKE SURE WE'RE NOT
GETTING IN THE WAY OF THAT.
WE MADE THAT CHANGE AS WELL.
TWENTY TWENTY ONE OBVIOUSLY
FROM THE COLORS AT LEAST I
WOULD SAY A MIXED RESULT.
>> WE HAD SOME POSITIVE WE
PROVIDED THE CLEAR BENEFIT THAT
IF YOU ARE DONATING LAND TO THE
CITY FOR PARKS OR RIGHT AWAY
YOU'RE NOT PENALIZED IN YOUR
FLOOR AREA RATIO CALCULATION WE
RELAX SOME OF THE STANDARD
ABOUT ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.
WE CREATED THE DC ONE ZONING
DISTRICT AND WE GREATLY
EXPANDED THE FLEXIBILITY
OF HOME BASED BUSINESSES FROM
WHAT IT WAS PREVIOUSLY.
BUT I THINK THAT THERE WAS SOME
SOME ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS THAT
MADE THINGS MORE DIFFICULT OR
MORE COSTLY.
WE ADDED THE REQUIREMENT
OF CHARGE OF PARKING SPACES AS
A PERCENTAGE OF THE VEHICULAR
PARKING SPACES YOU'RE
PROVIDING.
I THINK DR. SALTZ REFERENCED
THAT AND LIKE THERE'S SORT
OF LIKE THE USE THAT'S STILL AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO FIND WAYS
TO MITIGATE THAT.
BUT IT DOES ADD A COST TO
DEVELOPMENT.
WE HAD A SHORT TERM REGULATION
OR REGULATIONS TO THE CITY
WHICH DIDN'T EXIST PRIOR AND WE
INCREASED THE REQUIREMENTS FOR
OUTDOOR LIGHTING REGULATION.
WE SPECIFIED SPECIFIC COLOR
TEMPERATURE SHIELDING THAT WE
DIDN'T DO BEFORE.
SO JUST COMPLICATING A
RELATIVELY SMALL ASPECT
OF DEVELOPMENT BUT MAKING IT
MORE COMPLEX FOR COMPLIANCE
THAN IT WAS PREVIOUSLY.
>> TWENTY TWENTY TWO WE HAD
SOME BIG SWINGS.
WE CHANGE THE SITE PLAN
APPROVAL AUTHORITY AND A LOT
FOR A LOT OF PROJECTS FROM YOU
TO THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND
SOME FROM THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TO ME WE CHANGED THE
MINIMUM THRESHOLD THAT REQUIRES
A SITE PLAN AT ALL FROM TO
UNITS TO FOUR UNITS.
WE STARTED KICKING OFF OUR
ZONING OF ONE FOR TWO OF THE
CORRIDORS AND WE ELIMINATED
MINIMUM VEHICULAR PARKING
REGULATIONS FOR ALL USES AND
ALL ZONING DISTRICTS ACROSS THE
CITY ARE TO A IS SORT OF THAT
WE MADE CHANGES TO THE R TO A
THAT'S RIGHT IN LINE WITH SOME
OF THE CONVERSATIONS WE WERE
JUST HAVING TO REDUCE THE LOT
SIZE REAR SET BACK A LOT WITH
REQUIREMENTS AND THAT CONVERTED
ABOUT THE MAJORITY AROUND 75 80
PERCENT OF LATZ IS NON
CONFORMING TO CONFORMING TO
ACTUALLY ALLOW DUPLEXES TO BE
BUILT IN THAT DUPLEX ZONE.
SO A LOT OF MOMENTUM IN THAT
YEAR AND THEN IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE TO ONE WE'RE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO TWEAK IT.
I WANT TO BE HONEST YOU'RE
GOING TO SEE MORE IT'S A NEW
DISTRICT AND WE'RE GOING TO
LEARN FROM IT AND THAT'S TO BE
EXPECTED.
WE MADE SOME CHANGES TO PROVIDE
SOME MORE FLEXIBILITY FOR USES.
WE MADE SOME CHANGES TO ALLOW
OPEN SPACE IN THE FRONT TO
ACCOMMODATE FUTURE MULTIMODAL
DEPENDING ON WHAT THE PUBLIC
RIGHT OF WAY DIMENSIONS ARE
THERE.
AND GOING BACK TO THAT TWENTY
NINETEEN PREMIUM'S WE WENT BACK
ON THAT REGULATION WE
ELIMINATED PREMIUMS WHICH HAS
REALLY ALLOWED MORE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT TO BE OCCURRING
PARTICULARLY IN OUR DOWNTOWN
CORE AND THEN THIS YEAR WE'VE
GOT ONE TO ONE REZONING
COMPLETED.
YOU'VE HAD ONE READING
OF ANOTHER ONE.
WE HAVE MADE SOME MINOR CHANGES
REDUCING THAT THE WHERE
CONFLICTING LAND USE BUFFERS
HAVE TO HAPPEN BETWEEN WHAT
PLANNING STAFF WOULD ASSERT IS
VERY SIMILAR USES ESTABLISHED
AND NEW USE TO PROVIDE SOME
MORE FLEXIBILITY OF OFFICE
DISTRICTS AND SPECIFICALLY
AGAIN TRYING TO PROVIDE MORE
FLEXIBILITY FOR OUR TWO ZERO
GOALS ALLOWING FOR YARD SALE
SOLAR PANELS TO BE INSTALLED
WHERE THAT WAS PROHIBITED
EXPLICITLY PREVIOUSLY ON THE
HORIZON.
>> YOU PROBABLY RECALL YOU'VE
GIVEN US SOME HOMEWORK THROUGH
A COUPLE OF RESOLUTIONS.
>> THOSE ARE IN THE DRAFTING
STAGE.
YOU THOSE WILL GET MOVING HERE
SHORTLY.
OBVIOUSLY THE RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR FROM THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
AND I JUST WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE
A LOT OF THESE CHANGES THAT
HAPPENED OVER THESE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS THAT I JUST
HIGHLIGHTED.
IT'S AN ONGOING PROCESS SO IT'S
NOT STATIC WHEN WE AS STAFF SEE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR IMPROVEMENT
OR WE SEE AN OPPORTUNITY TO
SIMPLIFY OR CLARIFY.
YOU'LL SEE THAT THREAT
OF RECOMMENDATIONS AS WELL.
SO THERE WILL BE A LOT COMING
OUT OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN,
A LOT COMING OUT OF YOUR
DIRECTION.
BUT THOSE WON'T BE THE ONLY
SOURCES OF ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
.
SO NOT WAITING FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO INITIATE
SOME OF THAT WORK.
I JUST WANTED TO GIVE YOU A
SNAPSHOT THAT WE HAVE I THINK
MADE A LOT OF PROGRESS OVER THE
LAST COUPLE OF YEARS AND HAPPY
TO ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS THAT
YOU HAVE ABOUT ANY OF THAT
WORK.
>> THANK YOU, MR. LEINERT.
WE HAVE ABOUT TEN MINUTES FOR
QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS FROM YOU
DON'T HAVE TO HAVE ANY FLUMMERY
.
>> I JUST HAVE A QUICK QUESTION
SO I CAN KIND OF UNDERSTAND
YOUR EVALUATION OF THE COLORS.
WHAT'S THE RED MEANING LIKE
WHERE WE'RE BEING MORE
RESTRICTIVE IN THE GREEN WAS
WHEN WE'RE BEING MORE
PERMISSIVE.
CORRECT.
OK, GOT THANKS.
SEEING NO OTHER QUESTIONS.
THANK YOU MR. LA MR. DE LA
THANK YOU.
I THINK WE MIGHT HAVE SOME
PUBLIC COMMENT BUT A COUPLE
OF THINGS JUST TO SORT OF WRAP
THINGS UP SOME THINGS THAT WE
DIDN'T SAY EXPLICITLY THAT WE
NEED TO BE EXPLICIT ABOUT
VERTICAL DENSITY IN A
CONCENTRATED WAY HAS IMPACT ON
SUEUR CAPACITY AND AS WE SEE
GROWTH HAPPEN WE HAVE GOT TO DO
OUR HOMEWORK AROUND THAT THAT
CAME FRONT AND CENTER WITH THE
UNIVERSITY HOUSING THAT'S GOING
ON RIGHT NOW.
>> THEY HAD TO SPEND EIGHT
FIGURES IN ORDER TO DEAL WITH
CAPACITY BECAUSE THE
INFRASTRUCTURE IS OLD AND WE
CAN'T ALWAYS CARRY A LOAD
OF HIGHLY CONCENTRATED
CONSTRUCTION.
THE OTHER PART THAT WE DIDN'T
TOUCH ON IN TERMS OF THE
CONGESTION THE COUNCIL MEMBER
ACKMANN ASK ABOUT IF YOU HAVE
ACCELERATED CONSTRUCTION IN A
DENSE CITY LIKE OURS THAT IN
AND OF ITSELF IS GOING TO
CREATE CONGESTION IN THE SHORT
TERM BECAUSE YOU'RE GOING TO
LIMIT YOUR LANE SIZE WHILE IT'S
HAPPENING.
SO WE'RE GLAD TO HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK WITH YOU
THIS EVENING.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT OUR NEXT WORK
SESSION WILL BE BUT WE'LL GIVE
YOU SOME NOTICE.
>> THANKS.
THANK YOU, MR. HONEY.
WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC COMMENT
GENERAL TIME PUBLIC COMMENT IS
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO
COUNCIL AND THE COMMUNITY ABOUT
MATTERS OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST.
SPEAKERS WILL HAVE UP TO THREE
MINUTES TO ADDRESS COUNCIL WITH
ONLY ONE PERSON SPEAKING AT A
TIME F THOSE SPEAKING, I
ASSUME THE CITY CLERK WILL
NOTIFY YOU WHEN YOU HAVE THIRTY
SECONDS REMAINING AND WHEN YOUR
TIME HAS EXPIRED.
IF ANYONE IN THE ROOM WOULD
LIKE TO ADDRESS COUNSEL PLEASE
COME ON UP AND INTRODUCE
YOURSELF
.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M CATHY.
I'D LIKE TO CONGRATULATE MISSY
AND JACKIE ON SOME OF THE
WONDERFUL THINGS THAT THEY ARE
DOING FOR OUR COMMUN.
I TALKED TO MISSY WHILE AGO AND
I SAID DO YOU THINK WE COULD
JUST CLONE YOU AND HAVE YOU
WORK ON TRANSPORTATION BUT SHE
DIDN'T AGREE.
SO PEOPLE ASK WHY AM I HERE
TIME AFTER TIME AFTER TIME?
DON'T YOU GET TIRED OF THIS AND
I CAN'T LIVE WITH MYSELF.
I WOULD BE COMPLICIT IF I DID
NOT SPEAK OUT.
>> AND ONE OF THE ISSUES IS
THAT COUNCIL IS BEYOND
NEGLIGENT.
THEY'RE NOT JUST NEGLIGENT AND
NEGLIGENT IS A FAILING TO TAKE
PROPER CARE AND DOING SOMETHING
DIRECTORS HAVE BEEN NEGLIGENT
IN THEIR PERFORMANCE IN THE
PERFORMANCE OF THEIR DUTIES.
THIS COUNCIL JUST CHERRY PICKS
THE FUN THINGS AND THAT'S GREAT
AND YOU CAN HAVE A GOOD TIME
BUT AS MOST OF YOU HAVE HEARD
THE OFFICIAL CRASH DATA FOR
TWENTY TWENTY THREE WHORISH
YEAR FOR ANN ARBOR PEDESTRIAN
CRASHES SINCE TWENTY FOURTEEN
SO REPLACE THE WORD CONGESTION
WITH CRASH.
IT MIGHT BE SHORT LIVED EXCEPT
FOR THE PEOPLE WHO DON'T MAKE
IT THROUGH OR LIKE MY FRIEND
WHO WILL BE PERMANENTLY INJURED
FROM A CRASH.
I JUST DON'T KNOW WHAT TO DO
OTHER THAN SAY THAT I HAVE
TICKETS ON A TO FIX IT FOR THE
KINGS GO CROSSWALKS.
I'LL SEND AN EMAIL WITH NEW
PHOTOS.
I HAVE TALKED TO THE MAYOR
TWICE.
I HAVE TALKED TO MANY OF YOU
AND I'VE TALKED TO MILTON MY
ONLY RECOURSE RIGHT NOW IS TO
FILE A COMPLAINT WITH LAURA AND
THE PROBLEM WITH FILING A
COMPLAINT IS I HAVE TO GIVE
NAMES OF LICENSED ENGINEERS.
I DON'T WANT TO DO IT.
IT'S NOT THE ENGINEERS THAT ARE
AT FAULT.
IT IS THIS COUNCIL FOR NOT
PROVIDING THE RESOURCES AND
PRIORI TASING PEDESTRIAN SAFETY
.
>> SO IF SOMEONE HAS ANOTHER
IDEA, LET ME KNOW BUT I DON'T
THINK SO.
>> SO I WILL END ON THAT.
THANK YOU VERY THANK YOU.
WE HAVE MANY OTHER SPEAKERS
.
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME'S IVAN.
I WAS ACTUALLY GOING TO SPEAK
ON A DIFFERENT TOPIC TONIGHT
BUT WE DON'T HAVE VERY MANY
COUNCIL MEMBERS HERE SO
LISTENING AT WHAT COUNCIL AND
WHAT THE PRESENTATIONS WERE
WHICH I APPRECIATED HEARING AND
LIVING IN THE VERY CENTER
OF DOWNTOWN AND HAVING LIVED IN
THE CENTER OF CITIES LIKE NEW
YORK AND LONDON, I SEE
SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES IN THE
ROLE OF DENSITY IN A CITY LIKE
ANN ARBOR THAN I DO IN A CITY
LIKE LONDON OR NEW YORK.
HERE WE NEED CONCENTRATED
DENSITY BECAUSE OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN CAMPUS.
IT'S A MAJOR NOT JUST NATIONAL
BUT ALSO AN INTERNATIONAL
UNIVERSITY.
IT CHARACTERIZES A LOT OF THE
CHARACTER THE CITY ITSELF AND
THIS REALLY ISN'T A NORMAL
SITUATION FOR A SMALL CITY
DOWNTOWN LIKE ANN ARBOR AND WE
ARE A SMALL CITY.
I LOOK AT THE STATISTICS FOR
THE POPULATION AS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY THOUSAND.
YOU LOOK AT THE NUMBER
OF STUDENTS WHICH IS SOMEWHERE
AROUND FIFTY THOUSAND YOU
FIGURE WE PROBABLY GOT ANOTHER
TWENTY ODD THOUSAND STAFF AND
ASSOCIATED SERVICES.
SO HALF OF OUR CITY IS THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
ANN ARBOR IS CUTE AND IT'S
CHARMING AND I WOULD NOT
CHARACTERIZE NEW YORK OR LONDON
CUTE AND CHARMING.
I WOULD SAY OTHER THINGS ABOUT
THEM.
I LOVE THE CITIES BUT THEY'RE
VERY DIFFERENT PLACES.
WHEN I MOVED BACK I HAD A
CERTAIN AMOUNT OF TREPIDATION.
CAN I REALLY ADAPT?
>> I KNEW WHAT THE SCHOOLS WERE
LIKE BECAUSE I ATTENDED THE
SCHOOLS HERE.
IT WAS A BENEFIT FOR THE FAMILY
FOR MY SON TO BE ABLE TO ALSO
GO TO THE SCHOOLS HERE SO HUGE
BENEFITS BUT I WAS WORRIED
ABOUT WHAT IT WOULD BE LIKE.
WHAT I FOUND WAS IT WAS MORE
LIVABLE WHEN I LEFT AFTER
GRADUATING FROM THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN I FELT OLDER THEN
THAN I FEEL TODAY UNTIL I MOVED
TO MANHATTAN AND THEN I FELT
LIKE A BABY.
WHAT I FOUND WHEN I CAME BACK
AND I HAD GROWN AND IT WAS NO
LONGER JUST ANN ARBOR AND JUST
THE UNIVERSITY.
IT WAS THE ENTIRE COUNTY PEOPLE
WERE COMING IN AND THINGS HAVE
OPENED UP HERE THAT DIDN'T
EXIST WHEN I'D LEFT AND I FOUND
THAT I WAS IMMERSED IN A COUNTY
AND EVEN TO A CERTAIN DEGREE A
STATE I'D GONE TO A PLACE THAT
I IT PLACES I'D NEVER GONE
BEFORE.
BUT ONE OF THE CENTRAL THINGS I
FIND FOR LIVING DOWNTOWN THAT I
CAN SAY A COUPLE OF POINTS WE
CAN'T STOP TALKING ABOUT TARGET
OPENING UP ON STATE STREET
BECAUSE THERE'S NO PLACE TO
SHOP NOW WE'VE GOT A CAR WE
DON'T HAVE TO PAY FOR PARKING
OUR OUR TENANTS DO WE HAVE AN
OLD QUEEN AND STYLE HOME WITH A
FEW APARTMENTS IN IT AND WE
LIVE IN IT AS WELL.
THEY'RE THE ONES WITH THE
PROBLEM AND THEY'RE FINDING IT
MORE AND MORE DIFFICULT TO PAY
FOR PARKING AND GET PARKING
WHICH IS A PROBLEM FOR THEM.
AND THEN THE BIG QUESTION COMES
I WOULD NEVER WANT TO GET ON A
BUS TO GET OUT MIERS AND THIS
NEEDS TO BE THOUGHT ABOUT IN
PLANNING BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE
A METRO AND HOW ARE WE GOING TO
MANAGE TRANSIT BETWEEN SAY
YOU'VE I THINK IT'S A BRILLIANT
IDEA THAT WE'RE DEVELOPING
CAROLWOOD BRILLIANT COULD
BECOME A DIFFERENT DIFFERENT
DOWNTOWN BUT I HAVE TO GO IN
OUT ON STATE STREET BANK.
>> WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO
ABOUT THAT?
THANKS NEEDS TO BE CONSIDERING
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER PUBLIC
COMMENTS OR SOME DO WE HAVE
ANYONE ONLINE WHO WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS COUNCIL
AIR TIME?
>> I DON'T SEE ANY CALLERS ON
LINE SEEING ONE PUBLIC COMMENT
IS CLOSED.
DO WE HAVE ANY COMMUNICATIONS
FROM COUNCIL TODAY COUNCIL
MEMBERS ON?
>> WELL, WE HEAR A LOT ABOUT
THE KING'S CALLED WORK.
MY CHILDREN WENT TO KING
SCHOOL.
I RAN A WALKING BUS TICKET IN
SCHOOL FOR A NUMBER OF YEARS
WITH OVER 20 CHILDREN.
I WANT TO SHARE A RESPONSE FROM
LIZ MARGOLIS WHO IS THE
SCHOOL'S SAFETY AND DISTRICT
OPERATIONS DIRECTOR IN OUR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN RESPONSE TO
THESE QUESTIONS AROUND THE
SCHOOL CROSSWALK APS HAS ALWAYS
STATED THAT THE WALKWAYS ARE
NOT ON SCHOOL DISTRICT PROPERTY
SO WE DO NOT MAINTAIN THEM.
I ALSO RECALL THE WHO ACTUALLY
OWNS THE WALKWAYS IS UNCLEAR AS
THEY ARE NOT INCLUDED A CITY
PROPERTY EITHER.
SO WHAT WE'VE BEEN TALKING
ABOUT HAS BEEN PRIVATE PARCELS
OF WALKWAY THAT CUT THROUGH AND
AND THE SIDE OF THE SCHOOL THAT
HAS BEEN CASUALLY USED BY A
NUMBER OF STUDENTS FOR YEARS.
>> I'VE USED IT WHEN I WAS LATE
TO DROP MY CHILD OFF AT SCHOOL
.
I'M GLAD THAT THE CITY IS BEING
CREATIVE IN RESPONDING TO WHAT
IT CAN.
BUT THE IDEA THAT SOMEHOW WE
ARE CRIMINALLY RESPONSIBLE AND
THAT WE ARE THAT FORMAL COUNCIL
MEMBER WANTS TO FIND A WAY TO
REVOKE A STAFF LICENSE.
THAT'S NOT COLLABORATION.
THAT'S A THREAT.
AND IF YOU THINK THERE'S
CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR HERE THEN YOU
NEED TO LOOK INTO THE COUNTY
PROSECUTOR'S OFFICE AND MAYBE
THE STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND
PURSUE THAT ROUTE.
THANK YOU.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER COUNCIL
COMMENTS SEEING?
NONE.
CAN I GET A MOTION TO ADJOURN
COUNCIL?
NO SECRETARY OF MY COUNCIL
MEMBER I URGE ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR WE ARE ADJOURNED